

Related things going on during rise of Normans and Ottonians around first half of 10th century


------



some themes:

- sexism hides power of female nobles, written about less in history (e.g. Gerberga in France, women in viking lands, apparently a few people blackmailing pope)

- powerful people elected by nobles tend to be shit, kings by heredity also shit but occasionally give nobles/church problems (Henry IV an obvious example, Charles the simple too, King Hussein of Jordan modern example)

- nobles/church freak out about certain advisors (Henry IV's advisors and Charles the Simple's advisor Hagano, both cited as reasons to make war on them)

- Game of Thrones is an accurate and realistic deception of medieval human history

- Saxons are special and you better watch out for their tricks

- Otto I is just the greatest and everything goes his way


------

Rise of Holy Roman Empire/Ottonians and rise of Normans seem to be big things going on around this time in general, and that were important later in 11th century papal power grab

Holy Roman Empire was tight with the pope and/or some faction in church until they were not, Henry vs Gregory war happened

Normans went from band of outcast pirates to invading England and "the sword arm of Christianity"


also some things going on in Italian politics (Flodoard writes some entires on)


------


the popes were said to be all corrupt and controlled by one particular family:


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saeculum_obscurum
	Saeculum obscurum (Latin: the Dark Age) is a name given to a period in the history of the Papacy during the first half of the 10th century, beginning with the installation of Pope Sergius III in 904 and lasting for sixty years until the death of Pope John XII in 964. During this period, the Popes were influenced strongly by a powerful and corrupt aristocratic family, the Theophylacti, and their relatives.

	...The Theophylacti family originated from Theophylactus. They held positions of increased importance in the Roman nobility such as Judex, vestararius, gloriosissimus dux, consul and senator, and magister militum.[4] Theophylact's wife Theodora and daughter Marozia held a great influence over the papal selection and religious affairs in Rome through conspiracies, affairs, and marriages.[5]


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counts_of_Tusculum
	The counts of Tusculum were the most powerful secular noblemen in Latium, near Rome, in the present-day Italy between the 10th and 12th centuries. Several popes and an antipope during the 11th century came from their ranks. They created and perfected the political formula of noble-papacy, wherein the Pope was arranged to be elected only from the ranks of the Roman nobles. The Pornocracy, the period of influence by powerful female members of the family, also influenced papal history.

	...Theodora and Marozia held great sway over the popes during this time.[citation needed] In particular, as political rulers of Rome they had effective control over the election of new popes.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pope_John_XII
	Pope John XII (Latin: Ioannes XII; c. 930/937 – 14 May 964) was head of the Catholic Church from 16 December 955 to his death in 964. He was related to the Counts of Tusculum and a member of the powerful Roman family of Theophylact which had dominated papal politics for over half a century. His pontificate became infamous for the alleged depravity and worldliness with which he conducted it.

	...Conflict with Otto and death

	Otto left Rome on 14 February 962 in order to bring Berengar II to heel. Before leaving he suggested that John, "who passed his whole life in vanity and adultery", give up his worldly and sensual lifestyle. John ignored this advice and watched with increasing anxiety as Otto quickly drove Berengar out of the Papal States. Growing ever more fearful of the emperor's power, he sent envoys to the Magyars and the Byzantine Empire to form a league against Otto. He also entered into negotiations with Adalbert.[21]

	His ambassadors were captured by Otto I, who sent a deputation to Rome to discover what was happening behind his back.[22] John in the meantime sent his own envoys to Otto, including the future Pope Leo VIII, who tried to reassure the emperor that John was seeking to reform the papal court.[23] However, in 963, Otto next learned that Adalbert had been allowed to enter Rome for discussions with John. With Berengar effectively defeated and imprisoned, Otto returned to Rome, besieging it in the summer of 963. He found a city divided; supporters of the emperor who had reported Adalbert’s arrival in Rome had dug themselves in at Joannispolis, a fortified section of Rome centred on the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls. John and his supporters meanwhile retained the old Leonine City. At first John prepared to defend the city; appearing in armour, he managed to drive Otto’s forces across the Tiber River.[24] However, he quickly decided that he could not continue to defend the city, and so taking the papal treasury with him, he and Adalbert fled to Tibur.[25][26]

	Otto I subsequently summoned a council which demanded that John present himself and defend himself against a number of charges. John responded by threatening to excommunicate anyone who attempted to depose him.[27] Undeterred, the emperor and the council uncanonically deposed John XII, who by this time had gone hunting in the mountains of Campania,[28] and elected Pope Leo VIII in his stead.[29]

	An attempt at a revolt in support of John was mounted by the inhabitants of Rome even before Otto I left the city, but was put down with a large loss of life. However, upon the emperor’s departure, John XII returned at the head of a large company of friends and retainers, causing Leo VIII to flee to the emperor for safety.[30] Entering Rome in February 964, John proceeded to summon a synod which pronounced his deposition as uncanonical. After mutilating some of his enemies, he again was the effective ruler of Rome.[31][32] Sending Otgar, Bishop of Speyer to the emperor, he attempted to come to some accommodation with Otto, but before anything could come of it, John XII died on 14 May 964. According to Liudprand of Cremona, John died whilst enjoying an adulterous sexual encounter outside Rome, either as the result of apoplexy, or at the hands of an outraged husband.[33]


Did Otto replace the old Theopylact power behind pope with a new one?

Also ignored Pope Agapetus II at the big synod deciding on Artoldus vs Bishop Hugh, which Flodoard said was big deal to people in that country


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pope_Agapetus_II
	Pope Agapetus II (died 8 November 955) was Pope from 10 May 946 to his death in 955. A nominee of the Princeps of Rome, Alberic II, his pontificate occurred during the period known as the Saeculum obscurum.

	...The existence of an independent republic of Rome, ruled by Alberic II, (932–954), son of Marozia and the self-styled "prince and senator of the Romans", meant that Agapetus was prevented from exercising any temporal or secular power in Rome and the Papal States. Tensions between the rival kings of Italy, Berengar II and Otto I allowed Alberic to exercise complete control over Rome and Agapetus, meaning the pope was largely limited to managing internal church affairs.[1]

	...Agapetus was forced to intervene in the dispute over the occupancy of the See of Reims. He ordered a synod to be held at Ingelheim in June 948 to resolve the rights of the rival claimants, Hugh of Vermandois and Artald of Reims. He sent his legate Marinus of Bomarzo to act on his behalf, while Agapetus wrote to a number of bishops, asking them to be present at the council.[3] Through his legate the pope indicated his support for King Louis IV of France, and gave his support for reinstalling Artald as bishop of Reims.[4] This council was followed up by another one at Trier, where Agapetus was again represented by Marinus of Bomarzo.

	Then in 949, Agapetus held a synod in Rome, which confirmed the rulings of the two councils. It condemned the former bishop Hugh and it excommunicated his father, Herbert II, Count of Vermandois for his opposition to King Louis IV.[5]

	After receiving requests from both Louis IV of Francia and Otto I of Germany, Agapetus granted privileges to monasteries and nunneries within their respective kingdoms. He also was sympathetic towards Otto’s plans to restructure the bishoprics within Germany, which were eventually aborted due to pressure exerted by William of Mainz.[6] Around 948, Agapetus, granted the Archbishop of Hamburg the right of consecrating bishops in Denmark and other northern European countries instead of the pope.[7]


wikipedia says Agepetus II was controlled by Alberic and couldn't do much



some chaos and civil war was going on in Italy after dissolution of Carolingian empire as well, with Otto swooping in to save the day:


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otto_I,_Holy_Roman_Emperor
	Disputed Italian throne

	Upon the death of Emperor Charles the Fat in 888, the empire of Charlemagne was divided into several territories: East Francia, West Francia, the kingdoms of Lower and Upper Burgundy, and the Kingdom of Italy, with each of the realms being ruled by its own king. Though the pope in Rome continued to invest the kings of Italy as "emperors" to rule Charlemagne's empire, these "Italian emperors" never exercised any authority north of the Alps. When Berengar I of Italy was assassinated in 924, the last nominal heir to Charlemagne was dead and the imperial title was left unclaimed.[48] 

	King Rudolf II of Upper Burgundy and Hugh, Count of Provence, the effective ruler of Lower Burgundy, competed to gain dominion over Italy. In 926, Hugh defeated Rudolf, established de facto control over the Italian peninsula and was crowned as King of Italy.[49] His son Lothair was elevated to co-ruler in 931.[50] Hugh and Rudolf II eventually concluded a peace treaty in 933; four years later Lothair was betrothed to Rudolf's infant daughter Adelaide.[51]

	In 940, Berengar II, Margrave of Ivrea, a grandson of former King Berengar I, led a revolt of Italian nobles against his uncle Hugh. Forewarned by Lothair, Hugh exiled Berengar II from Italy, and the margrave fled to the protection of Otto's court in 941. In 945, Berengar II returned and defeated Hugh with the support of the Italian nobility. Hugh abdicated in favor of his son and retired to Provence; Berengar II made terms with Lothair and established himself as the decisive power behind the throne. Lothair married the sixteen-year-old Adelaide in 947 and became nominal king when Hugh died on 10 April 948, but Berengar II continued to hold power as mayor of the palace or viceroy.[52][53]

	Lothair's brief "reign" came to an end with his death on 22 November 950, and Berengar II was crowned king on 15 December, with his son Adalbert of Italy as co-ruler.[54] Failing to receive widespread support, Berengar II attempted to legitimize his reign and tried to force Adelaide, the respective daughter, daughter-in-law and widow of the last three Italian kings, into marriage with Adalbert. Adelaide fiercely refused and was imprisoned by Berengar II at Garda Lake. With the help of Count Adalbert Atto of Canossa, she managed to escape from imprisonment. Besieged by Berengar II in Canossa, Adelaide sent an emissary across the Alps seeking Otto's protection and marriage. A marriage to Adelaide would have strengthened the king's position to claim the Italian throne and ultimately the emperorship. Knowing of her great beauty and immense wealth, Otto accepted Adelaide's marriage proposal and prepared for an expedition into Italy. 


------


major happeneinings in 9th-10th century according to Wikipedia:


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_the_Middle_Ages#10th_century

Treaty of Verdun 843, Charlemang's Empire divided

Vikings start taking over Russia 862

Bulgaria converts to Christianity 864

Vikings invading England 866

Iceland settled by vikings 874

Vikings attack Paris 885-866

First Bulgerian Empire doing well 896-927, develop alphabet and literary school

Maya empire starts collapsing 900

China got split up 907, fighting

King Edward the Elder of England defeats vikings 910

Cluny Abbey founded 910, said to become leaders of "Cluniac Reforms"

Rollo gets Normandy 911

Bulgerians defeat Byzantines 917

Henry the Fowler elected 919

King Aethelstan unites and founds Kingdom of England 927

Caliphate in Iberian peninsula under Abdar-ar Rahman III united 929-1031

Otto major victory against Magyars 955

China united under Song Dynasty 960

Otto crowned Holy Roman Emperor 962

Otto deposes Pope John XII and replaces him with Pope Leo VIII 963-964

"Peace and Truce of God" formed 989, wikiepdia says "The first movement of the Catholic Church using spiritual means to limit private war, and the first movement in medieval Europe to control society through non-violent means."



------

Cluniac reform said to be important, had component against secular control of church (like Gregorian reform?)



------


another movement going on in church:




From Anne Latowsky "Emperor of the World", pg 4


	The fortunes of “Charlemagne and the East” in the French-speaking world after the First Crusade prove, in fact, to have been relatively meager. Instead, I was able to show that this invented chapter in the Carolingian past was fundamentally concerned with the continuity of the Roman Empire and the establishment of Frankish authority after the coronation of 800. To respond to the questions of how and why the episode had evolved as it did, I needed to look not to the literature of the kingdom of France, but to the promotion of the German inheritance of the Roman Empire beginning in the tenth century. Charlemagne’s peaceful envelopment of the East into the fold of his theoretical Christian empire began in Einhard as the product of medieval biographical practice, and never really ceased to be an example of the rhetorically governed practice of commemorating royal deeds and vir- tues, but it flourished in the propagandistic literature of the German empire, far more so than in France. The episode did eventually play a role in the construction of France’s Carolingian past, but, as I demonstrate in my fi nal chapter, that phenomenon occurred both later and differently than has previ- ously been argued. The majority of the pages that follow are therefore con- cerned with Charlemagne’s invented encounters with Byzantium and the Holy Land in the literature and propaganda of the Carolingian Empire and its Teutonic successors between the ninth and the early thirteenth centuries.


Carolingian empire first thought of as continuation of Roman empire

after Carolingian dissolution, German inheritance of Roman empire promoted in 10th century

propaganda about Charlemagne christian Empire flourished in propagandistic literature of German empire, even more than in France

Carolingian empire and German successors continued legends of Charlemagne's encounters in Middle East from 9th to early 13th century


also after pope power grab in 10th-11th century some of these guys thought of themselves as continuation of Roman empire 


	...This book argues that the journey to Jerusalem and Constantinople served as an assertion of symbolic victory for the West, and that this fantasy of Frankish protective custody of all of Christendom was the product of an imperial rather than a royal mindset. The evidence for this distinction becomes more pronounced in the late elev- enth century when the Charlemagne who was chosen by God to protect all Christians began to function as an imperialist retort to reformist narratives of the papal origins of Carolingian imperial authority. Rather than affi rming Constantine the Great’s relinquishing of imperial authority to the Holy See, “Charlemagne and the East” offered an antidote to memories of eighth- and ninth-century popes legitimating the temporal authority of the Franks. Instead, the Charlemagne who symbolically conquered the East offered a model of divinely elected lay protection of the Christian imperium.


In late 11th century (time of Henry IV) Charlegmagne image used in Gregorian reform fight, I guess pope side decided Carolingian empire authority had papal origins while Henry side used the narratives around Charlemagne to support Henry authority.


	...The invented story takes on further signifi cance, however, when considered in light of the fact that the Carolingian biographer con- structed the episode based on a commonplace of classical imperial biography that connoted Roman universal dominion. The classical motif of surren- dering foreign nations, to which I will refer using variations on the term “foreign embassy topos,” is exemplifi ed by a scene in Aeneid 8, where Vergil describes the shield given to Aeneas on which are depicted vanquished for- eign nations parading before the emperor of a triumphant Rome. 13 Versions of that motif became a commonplace in the discourse of empire and Roman renewal throughout the Middle Ages. 14 In an example from a tenth-century chronicle of the deeds of the Saxons, Widukind of Corvey celebrates the transfer of empire to Otto I, to whom the Romans, Greeks, and Saracens all signal their surrender with exotic gifts and never-before-seen animals. 15 A splendid version of the motif appears in the dedication of the Gospel Book of Otto III from Reichenau, in which the emperor sits in majesty as representa- tives of various surrendering peoples, with heads bowed, process before him bearing gifts and tribute. 16 The passage from Odilo of Cluny in the epigraph that heads this introduction also provides a vivid example of the topos as it appeared within a stylized letter praising the Salian emperor Henry III, who had been crowned emperor in 1046 immediately following the elevation of Pope Clement II. 17


motif of foreign nations bowing and surrendering to Roman unversal domination was commonplace in "discourse of of empire and Roman renewal" throughout middle ages, includes Widukind's "deeds of the Saxons" where Otto gets fancy crown ceremony and later the Romans, Greeks, and Saracens all signal their surrender with exotic gifts. Motif also in Reichenau dedication of Gospel Book to Otto III were representatives of various surrendering peoples with heads bowed process before him bearing gifts of tribute.


	...The Christianization of the concept of eternal Rome that occurred dur- ing late antiquity had left as a legacy to the Middle Ages a vision of the Roman Empire as an instrument of divine providence, with the emperor as vicar of Christ on earth. 19 The imperial coronation of 800 was the fi rst time a pope had claimed a role in selecting an emperor, and debates persisted for centuries over what the ceremony had implied about the competing roles of the papacy and lay leadership in the election and coronation of emperors in the Christian West. In an example of the contested nature of imperial coronations in the eleventh century, an image of the coronation of Henry III in 1046 depicts an enthroned Christ, not Clement II, crowning the kneeling German king and his wife as emperor and empress, while announcing that they will rule through him. 20 Just as medieval authors created confl icting versions of the events of Christmas 800, they also re-created Charlemagne’s post-coronation diplomatic encounters with the imperial East and the Holy Land as part of the larger discussion of the Frankish inheritance of Rome. Since Einhard had established those exchanges as having occurred just after the coronation, they came to represent an essential step in the process of defi ning Christian imperial authority in a newly divided realm. This was particularly the case during the Investiture Contest of the late eleventh cen- tury, when the question of Pope Leo’s role in the coronation of Char- lemagne and the nature of the accompanying transfer of imperial authority became matters of intense partisan debate.


the concept of an eternal Rome got Christianized (what does that mean exactly?) in late antiquity and its legacy in Middle ages was the vision of the Roman Empire as an instrument of divine providence, with the emperor as vicar of Christ on earth. Medeival authors gave conflicting events of Charlemagne's coronation. This was related to the papal vs. emperor authority fight, especially the investiture controversy.


	The versions of Charlemagne’s encounters with the East that occur in works written prior to the Investiture Contest all affirm the Frankish king’s indebtedness to the Holy See for his status as emperor. They also emphasize a spirit of cooperation between Charlemagne and Leo in their mission to protect Christendom. Beginning in the late eleventh century, a new scenario supplanted this vision of cooperation, and Charlemagne’s status as imperial protector began to be portrayed as having been ordained by God and granted by the Roman people, without mediation by the papacy. This vision was in line with the claims of imperialist theorists at the time, who were working against assertions by the Holy See of its own brand of universal authority in the empire. As Brett Whalen ably demonstrates in his recent book, the estab- lishment of the papacy as the center of Christendom defi ned as the Roman Empire became an ongoing project for the church. 21 Evidence from the period of most-intense confl ict in the late eleventh century, especially Benzo of Albo’s panegyric to Henry IV, the Ad Heinricum, reveals that in an atmo- sphere of competing expressions of imperial universalism, the Charlemagne who providentially united East and West ran counter to reformist visions of the pope at the helm of the Christian imperium.


author wrote book looking at stories of Charlemagn's encounters with the east and how these stories cropped up over time and were used in propaganda and such

before the investiture contest, stories of Charlemagne's encounters with the East all affirmed his indebtedness to papacy for emperor status, and emphasized a spirit of cooperation between Charlemagne and Leo. Beginning during investiture contest, this story was supplanted by a narrative where Charlemagne's emperor status was ordained by God and the Roman people without papal mediation. This narrative was used by pro-imperialist theorests at the time opposing papal claims of universal authority. 

Apparently during the investiture contest it was an ongoing project for pro-papal clerics to sling theory arguing the papacy as "the center of Christendom defined as the Roman Empire"


this came up in the book at propaganda from Henry and the Pope at this time--there was a theological theory fight between two camps, one trying to justify papal supremecy and the other trying to support henry

different factions in the church interesting, should be studied more. Maybe factions extended back to time of Otto, with some bishops joining rebellions against him while others were close to his government (or contributing to education of his daughter and white-washing some of the seedy things he did in the case of Widukind of Corvery)


in 10th century the pro-Otto guys seemed like the bad guys, but in Henry IV's time the pro-Henry guys came off as the good guys. But in Otto's time the bad guys would ostensibly be for Otto's secular involvement in church politics while in Henry's time they would be against it.

If there was continuity among these factions, what did they rally around? Like if there were factions, what defines each side?


	In the mid-twelfth century, this new Charlemagne, whose imperial authority was God-ordained and unmediated by Rome, appealed to the promoters of Frederick Barbarossa during his confl ict with the Holy See. Barbarossa’s unsanctioned canonization of the Carolingian emperor in 1165 with the creation of a liturgical cult in honor of the new saint centered at Aachen marked the high point of his celebration of Charlemagne as a model Christian emperor and ideal forerunner of the German emperors. Scholars have often argued that the audacious act was intended as a means of reclaim- ing the Frankish emperor from the French. 22 This theory conforms to a more general historical narrative of rivalry between the German empire and the kingdom of France, but it does not account for the fact that the Capetian monarchy and its spokesmen at the royal abbey of Saint-Denis actually did relatively little to cultivate the memory of Charlemagne as emperor during the twelfth century. Frederick’s actions are better understood when viewed within the context of generations of creative appropriation of episodes in Charlemagne’s biography, especially those that could be altered to nourish a vision of the primacy of lay authority in the empire.


the "God-ordained and unmediated by Rome" image of Charlemagne appealed to promoters of Frederick Barbarossa, who also had a conflict with the pope. He created a cult of Charlemagne and celebrated that he was recently made a saint. Scholars often argue this was part of Frederick in a rivalry with the French, but the Capetians never did this and author says it works better to look at it as Frederick trying to use the image around Charlemagne to argue for his primacy over the empire.


more interesting things about church back then according to author:


	...Morse describes how written lives were constructed according to episodes, and argues that, more often than not, the value of a particular episode lay in its rhetorical pertinence. The importance of histori- cal truth was therefore often secondary to rhetorical styling and intertextual play. Medieval biographical writing, whether secular or hagiographical, was built not on a series of facts, but on rhetorical topoi, the recognizable com- monplaces that functioned as building blocks of the genre. Biographers wrote by compiling scenes and stories with the expectation that readers would rec- ognize the commonplaces that were employed and then compare them to other instances of their usage. The units of composition were often altered, transformed, and amplifi ed, while still claiming to represent the essential nar- rative of the life of the subject. Moreover, the events in the life of a subject regularly pointed outward to similar episodes in other biographies rather than inward to the personality and actual life of the subject. 24 The invention and reproduction of Charlemagne’s post-coronation encounters with the East richly exemplify these literary processes.


often, medieval writers put truth second to rhetorical pertinence

can see that in writing of Widukind, Wace kindof but not as much. Widukind basically admitted he was doing this, came off like he was writing a novel, like epic story of Otto and saxons waxing barbarians and overcoming plots of tricky adversaries, says things about what people were thinking and motive that he'd have no way of knowing, block quotes of epic speeches, characterize Otto opponents as barbarians/savages, put in his opinion on things like Otto got "better" advice to do trial by champions instead of trial by arbiter.

Widukind's description of death of Tahnkmar shows some interesting bias and a little bit of rhetorical trickery. Thankmar opposed Otto but Widukind describes him as energetic and of "fierce disposition" (compare to Widukind's description of Otto's other brother Henry) and laments that he died. When Otto's army enters the town where Thankmar is, Widukind points out "The army pursued him to the church, and in particular the followers of Henry, who lamented and sought to avenge the injury to their lord" and leaves it to implication that it was a Henry plot that killed Thankmar. Widukind goes on to describe the knight who killed Thankmar as a wicked church-gold stealer.

Widukind's following description of Otto's reaction also revealing: "When he was informed, he disapproved of the rash action of these knights, but with civil war still raging he could not be sad [about what had happened]. He lamented his brother’s ill-fortune, showing the clemency of his disposition, although he deliberately said little in praise of him." How would Widukind know if Otto was or wasn't sad and "deliberately" didn't say any praise of him? Wikipedia says Otto had Thankmar killed, not sure what actually happened but seems more likely than not that Otto would have been angry at Thankmar for trying to overthrow him. Widukind comes off as making too many excuses here and shifting focus to whether or not Otto was sad.

Another thing that might be rhetorical trick from Widukind: paints opposition to Otto as Henry supporters when it might have been that they just didn't like Otto and his associates. In earlier coup Widukind says Henry was captured and dragged around like a slave by Otto opponents.


Wace is different, doesn't use as much rhetorical tricks and comes off as trying to retell the facts (which is what he was supposed to be doing, in contrast with what Widukind said he was doing). Still does thing where he talks about how decisionmakers were feeling and assigns motive, and Wace's assigned dispositions and motives sometimes differ from other historians.

Wace uses rhetorical trick of summing things up in ways that are technically true but misleading--e.g. "Rou was on this side of the Epte and the king on the other. Duke Robert, who wanted the peace, was with him." But Robert would go on to fuck over the King and his successors (and his son would do the same), and Dudo records that he was on Rollo's side of the river, making deals with Rollo and pushing for him to get more territory, implying broader motives for Robert. Robert "wanting peace" then technically true, but doesn't tell the whole story of what he was up to.


also helps: if writing on historical happenings, if anyone alive who remembers that and could check it, unlikely they would make something up. If writing on something that happened long ago, easier to make something up (e.g. shifting interpretations of papal authority for Charlegmen's reign like author mentions). If making something up, easier to get away with it if you have an out. Wace differs from Dudo on what happened in conversation between Charles and nobles in conversation where Normandy treaty was decided, but by then nobody would be alive to remember that conversation. Wace says Rollo himself flipped Charles on his back by accident instead of sending a warrior, but could easily say he misremembered what he read or heard it differently. That Wace decided to write an account of this event that characterizes it in a different way instead of ommitting it entirely also says something.


How writers use rhetorical tricks doesn't necessarily always confuse things but can give more information if you can figure out their bias. In reading ancient or modern historians, probably one of the most useful skills is being able to spot a liar.

also helps when reading NY Times

