

Widukind wrote a chronicle on the time that Flodaord's Annals and some of Dudo's Norman book covers


He was a Saxon and dedicated his book to Otto's daughter


https://classesv2.yale.edu/access/content/user/haw6/Vikings/Widukind.html
	Widukind was a monk in the monastery of Corvey in Western Germany. In 967/968, he wrote a history of the Saxons, which he dedicated to Abbess Mathilda of Quedlinburg. She was a daughter of German Emperor Otto I ("the Great"), who is the hero of Widukind's book. Among the subjects that Widukind describes in detail is a rebellion in the 960s against Otto. One of its leaders was count Wichman, who at one point took refuge in Denmark. This gives Widukind the opportunity to tell the story of how King Harald of Denmark was converted to Christianity.


here is some of it with apparently some interesting bits cut out:


https://www.leeds.ac.uk/arts/download/1965/the_deeds_of_the_saxons_by_widukind_of_korvey


an exceprt is in this collection of primary sources in a yale class on viking history:


https://classesv2.yale.edu/access/content/user/haw6/Vikings/Widukind.html


it says a cleric tried to convert the Danish King Harald to Christianity (sadly not in the one found online, not sure what cut out and what not)



------

background on Widukind of Corvey:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Widukind_of_Corvey
	Otto's rise as undisputed ruler of a German kingdom against the reluctant dukes made great impression on the Benedictine monk. By his own admission, Widukind first wrote several Christian hagiographies before he began his Res gestae saxonicae. He dedicated the chronicles to Abbess Matilda of Quedlinburg (c. 955–999), daughter of Emperor Otto the Great, like himself a descendant of the Saxon leader Widukind. The annals were written after Otto's coronation by Pope John XII on 2 February 962; however, though both Otto and his father Henry the Fowler are named Imperatores, this incident is not mentioned. After the elevation of Matilda's brother Otto II as co-emperor in 967 and the death of her half-brother Archbishop William of Mainz one year later, the abbess remained the only important member of the Ottonian dynasty in the Saxon lands under regent Hermann Billung; therefore, Widukind may have begun the writing—or started all over again—to create a kind of mirror for princes.


Otto wrote biographies of of Catholic saint sbefore writing Deeds of the Saxons


the book might have been for teaching Matilda how to run things: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mirrors_for_princes


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Deeds_of_the_Saxons

Widukind born 925, entered abbey at Corvey around 940-942 and book was finished in 967 or 968, not contemporary for some things

https://cola.unh.edu/article/2014/12/deeds-saxons
	Widukind, likely of noble birth, received a thorough education in both biblical and classical texts. When writing the Gestae, Widukind also had available the extensive library at Corvey, with its large collection of ancient texts as well as numerous works from the eighth and ninth centuries. Widukind drew on these, and even more contemporary written sources to complement and inform orally transmitted information that he received from many sources including people closely associated with the Ottonian royal court.

	...His close relationship with the royal court enabled him to provide an "insider's" view of the people and events that shaped the political and military history of the most powerful kingdom in Europe. 


Widukind had access to library at Corvery and interviews with people at Royal court as sources


------


https://muse.jhu.edu/chapter/1441118
	BOOK ONE åHere begins the preface to the first book for Lady Mathilda, the daughter of the Emperor. To Lady Mathilda, in her blossoming maidenhood,1 illustrious for her imperial majesty and her singular wisdom, I Widukind of Corvey, the least of the servants of Stephen and Vitus,2 martyrs of Christ, completely at your service, offer true greetings in the name of our Savior. Although the unique glory of your father’s power exalts you, and your highly renowned wisdom graces you, our humility presumes upon the ever-present clemency of your scepter,3 because our devotion, even though it is not worthy, has been received by your grace. For in reading the deeds of your exceptionally powerful father and most glorious grandfather, which have been committed to memory by our labor, you have what is necessary to transform the best and most glorious into something even better and even more glorious.4 We confess that we were not able to in3 all of their deeds. 5 Rather, we have written summarily and selectively6 so that the language will be clear and not seem pedantic to the readers.7 But first, I have taken care to write a little bit about the origin and status of the people whom Henry ruled initially as lord of their affairs,8 so that in reading these things, you can delight your soul, relieve your cares, and have time for beautiful leisure.9 Therefore, may your splendor read this book, and be mindful of the piety and devotion with which we wrote it. Farewell 


		1. Mathilda (955–99) was the daughter of Otto I and his second wife, Adelheid. At the time of the composition of Widukind’s text, in 967, Mathilda was twelve or thirteen years old and was being prepared for her role as regent in the absence of both her father and her brother, Otto II, in Italy. 

		2. These are the patron saints of the monastery of Corvey. 

		3. This is a reference to Mathilda’s impending service as regent, during the absence of her father Otto I (936–73) and her brother Otto II (973–83) in Italy.

		4. The subject of optima and gloriosissima is a feminine singular. Consequently, Widukind might be suggesting that the object of this work was to provide Mathilda with a means of improving herself. However, in his subsequent presentation of Henry I and Otto I, Mathilda’s grandfather and father, Widukind regularly stresses the ways in which their deeds improved and strengthened the res publica. Consequently, we see Widukind’s decision to leave unnamed the direct object of efficiaris as a conscious act of ambiguity, with the implication that Mathilda would be in a position to improve both herself and the res publica by reading his text.

		
		5. Widukind is emphasizing here that he has omitted information about both Henry I and Otto I. This has two important implications. First, he is seeking to avoid potential criticism for omitting information to which others may have access. Second, in the context of understanding Widukind as a historian, he is making clear that his text is not all-inclusive, but rather that he is approaching his work selectively.

		6. Sallust, Catilinae, 4.

		7. Widukind is conflating two issues here, namely content and presentation. Over the course of the Res gestae, Widukind regularly condenses or summarizes events, and chooses to omit matters that are recorded, sometimes at length, in other contemporary historical works. In addition, most of Widukind’s text also is written in simple, straightforward prose. Ironically, it is precisely in the preface to each book, including this one, that Widukind demonstrates his rhetorical skills, and potentially runs the risk of having his language be judged excessive, i.e., fastidiosus.

		8. Widukind uses the unusual circumlocution rerum dominus in place of king. This usage recalls Suetonius’s Vita of Octavian, chs. 40 and 155, where the term is used to denote the Roman people as rulers of the world.

		9. The implication seems to be that by reading Widukind’s text Mathilda will save sufficient time in learning her duties that she will have an opportunity to enjoy leisure time as well. The reference here to otium draws the attention of the reader to Cicero’s Dream of Scipio, which appears in the sixth book of his De re publica. The Dream was widely popularized during the early Middle Ages by Macrobius in his Comentarii in Somnium Scipionis... 


Widukind says he wrote the book for Matlida, so that she can learn from the deeds of her father and grandfather (are these "deeds of the saxons"?) and "transform the best and most glorious into something better." Widukind says he wrote selectively and summarily in some places so it wouldn't be pedantic. He makes it sound like Matilda is very special and they're all working for her

	...To Lady Mathilda, in her blossoming maidenhood,1 illustrious for her imperial majesty and her singular wisdom, I Widukind of Corvey, the least of the servants of Stephen and Vitus,2 martyrs of Christ, completely at your service, offer true greetings


imagine being a teenager and reading that? It's like getting accepted to Hogwarts

gives some insight on why Ottonian royalty might have liked clergy


...


https://www.leeds.ac.uk/arts/download/1965/the_deeds_of_the_saxons_by_widukind_of_korvey

these exceprts start off with how Henry the Fowler came to power

	(25) The king [Conrad I] went to Bavaria and was fighting there against Arnulf 1
	when, according to some reports, he was wounded, and so he returned to his
	homeland. When he realised that his illness was becoming more serious and his initial
	good fortune was ebbing away, he summoned his brother, 2 who was present there
	visiting him, and spoke to him as follows. ‘I feel’, he said, ‘that I cannot cling to this


Henry predecessor fighting duke Arnolf

	
	...(26) In accordance with the king’s instructions, Eberhard went to Henry, and
	handed over all the [royal] treasures to him, making peace with him and promising his
	friendship, in which pledge he continued faithfully until the end. Then the princes and
	the greater by birth among the army of the Franconians gathered at a place called
	Fritzlar, 5 where in the presence of all the people of the Franconians and Saxons they
	designated him [Henry] as king. But when he was offered anointing by the principal
	bishop, who at that time was Herigar, 6 along with the crown, he would not accept it,
	although he did not despise this offer. ‘It is enough for me’, he said, ‘to be declared
	and named as king by my great men, with the help of God’s grace and your own
	piety. Let anointing and coronation be for better men than us, for we do not consider
	ourselves worthy of such an honour.’ This declaration was pleasing to the whole vast
	crowd, who raised their right arms on high and shouted the name of the new king
	again and again.


did Nazis borrow this? I think some of them liked this part of German history

In Widukind's telling, Henry humbly refused crown and said it is enough for God and great men to call him King and crowd ate it up

a lesson for Matilda? how to win over a crowd

wikipedia says Henry the Fowler became King 24 May 919, so this is around start of Flodoard's Annals


	(27) After being made king in this way, Henry marched with all his following to
	make war against Burchard, the Duke of Swabia. 7 The latter was a fierce warrior, but
	he felt that it would be wise, since he could not resist the king’s attack, to yield
	himself, and all his towns and people, to him. Once this was safely accomplished, he
	marched on into Bavaria, over which Duke Arnulf ruled. He discovered that the duke
	was staying in the citadel of the town of Regensburg, and so he besieged him there.
	Arnulf realised that he was not strong enough to resist the king, and so he had the
	gates opened and went out to meet him, surrendering himself and all his duchy
	(regnum) to him. Henry received him honourably, and he was designated as ‘the
	king’s friend’ (amicus regni). The king flourished and grew stronger day by day,
	becoming more and more powerful and illustrious. After bringing peace and unity to a
	kingdom that under his predecessors had been riven by civil war and plagued by
	external attack, he led his banners against Gaul and the kingdom of Lotharingia. ...
	[In cc. 28-9 Widukind provides an excursus describing the break-up of the
	Carolingian Empire, the origins of Lotharingia, and the disputes with the West
	Frankish Carolingians over this region.]


Henry marches on Burchard of Swabia and Arnulf of Bavaria. They yield to him and Widukind says Henry brought peace and unity to a kingdom plauged by civil war and external attack


	(30) Because of this, King Henry moved his forces against Charles and several times defeated his army, for ‘fortune favoured the brave’. 8 For Hugh, whose father Robert the son of Odo, had been slain by the army of Charles, sent and captured him by treachery, and kept him under guard until he finished his life. 9 Hearing of what had happened to Charles, King Henry lamented the mutability of human things and wondered at their common fortune, since he was distinguished no less by his religious faith than by his skill at arms. He decided indeed to refrain from [taking up] arms, for he hoped rather that the Lotharingians would be overcome through diplomacy (arte), since that people is fickle and accustomed to deceits, and ready to take up arms in response to new developments. There was at that time a certain man among the Lotharingians called Christian, who seeing that all the king’s affairs were prospering, 10 sought how he might be insinuate himself further into the king’s graces. Pretending to be ill, he summoned into his presence Gilbert, to whom rule over the province had been granted through paternal succession; he captured him through treachery and sent him under guard to King Henry. Gilbert was born of an ancient and noble kin. The king received him with great joy, since he had decided that it was only through him that he could gain possession of the whole kingdom of Lothar. Since he could see that Gilbert was a young man of character, and distinguished by birth, power and wealth, he treated him generously, and eventually married him to his daughter Gerberga, thus joining him both by friendship and by affinity to himself, and entrusting him with rule over all of Lotharingia. 11



Widukind says Henry moved his forces against Charles (crowned in 920) after this and "several times defeated his army" since "fortune favoured the brave"

get same impression from Flodoard of Charles getting his ass kicked by Henry, show up as major player in the fights in France with some nobles and later King Louis siding with Ottonian kings

Widukind is basically calling Charles a bitch here (albeit with hindsight of him getting captured) and get similar negative impression of Charles from Floddoard, frequently points out how Charles attacked "even during lent" or some holiday


"he hoped rather that the Lotharingians would be overcome through diplomacy (arte), since that people is fickle and accustomed to deceits, and ready to take up arms in response to new developments"--this played out in Flodoard too, with some Dukes switching sides multiple times, and episodes like this:


https://books.google.com/books?id=OpsTS-E_pFgC&
	...Upon his freedom, Gislebert repeatedly devastated the lands of Berengar and of his own brother Ragenarius and of Count Issac [of Cambrai]. Afterwards, Giselbert sent envoys to King Raoul so that he might be received by the king. The king detested the perjuries and inconstancy of Gislebert

	...Meanwhile, Frderick ... frequentyl plundered about that place, which led King Louis, who was greatly annoyed


iirc there were multiple entires in his Annels like "and then he went pillaging about the countryside and people asked him to stop"

Widukind says Henry recruited "Gilbert" who was married to "Gerberga"

Flodoard says "King Louis returned to the Lotharingian kingdom and married Gerberga, the widow of Giselbert"

this says Gilbert and "Gislebert" the same, Gilbert swore fealty to Henry in 925: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gilbert,_Duke_of_Lorraine


According to Flodoard, Charles was chasing Gislebert and "laying waste" to Lotharingia by 922 and Gislebert joined armies with Hugh the White against Charles that year. Flodoard records in 923 that Gislebert invited Henry to raid Lotharingia during a viking attack, and Otho and other allies of Raoul deserted to Henry:


https://books.google.com/books?id=OpsTS-E_pFgC&
	Meanwhile, the Northmen raided certain of our pagi across the Oise, and our people raided their land. After numerous embassies passed back and forth, the Northmen promised to make peace with Count Heribert [of Vermandois], Archbishop Seulfus and the other Franks who were encamped with them against the Northmen. This was on the condition that the more spacious land beyond the Seine, which they had requested, would be given to them. In the meantime, as was said, King Raoul returned to Laon, and the Northmen sent hostages and accepted a truce from the king to last until the middle of May.

	As these things were happening, it became known that Henry [king of Germany], at the invitation of Count Gislebert [of Lotharingia] and [Arch]bishop Roger of Trier, who had not yet submitted themselves to [King] Raoul, crossed the Rhine and raided Lothair's Kingdom. He laid waste the area between the Rhine and the Moselle, carried off herds and plow animals, drained away other resources and captured many people, including youths. When Henry heard that Raoul was gathering an army not only from Francia but also from all Burgundy, he retired into his own kingdom after agreeing to a truce with the Lotharingians to last unil the first day of October of the following year. However, Otho [count of Verdun] deserted to Henry, along with those who had committed themselves to Raoul.


Flodoard records that in 924, Gislebert and Otho started a war while Henry was ill, and around the same time Hugh the White, Heribert and Archbishop Seulfus made a deal with the Normans and gave them more land:

	
	...Henry [king of Germany] was in the lands bordering on the Sarmatians when he, like Raoul, fell ill and was delayed for the entire summer. Meanwhile, a dispute arose between Gislebert [of Lotharingia] and his brother Ragenarius, as well as conflict between Otho and Boso. The result was killings, fires and raids by both sides. The Northmen made a peace with the Franks by oaths, due to the efforts of Count Hugh [the Great], Count Heribert [of Vermandois], and Archbishop Seulfus because King Raoul was absent. However, with the king's consent, more lands were conceded to the Northmen in a pact of peace, that is, Maine and the Bessin.


In 925, records that King Raoul went to Burgundy to fight a Norman invasion by Ragenoldus, but was delayed from taking the fight to them by Hugh the White, Heribert, and Gislebert:


	When the year 925 began, Ragenoldus with his Northmen devastated Burgundy. Count Warnerius [of Troyes], Manasses, Bishop Ansegisus [of Troyes], and Bishop Gozcelinus [of Langres] joined forces to oppose them at Mons Calaus and killed more than 800 of the Northmen. However, Count Warnerius was captured and killed when the horse on which he was mounted was killed, and Bishop Ansegisus of Troyes was wounded. When King Raoul learned of this, he set out to Burgundy with certain soldiers from Francia, that is, those from the church of Reims, along with Bishop Abbo of Soissons and a few others who escorted him, including Heribert [of Vermandois]. When he collected a substantial number of soldiers from Burgundy, he advanced to the fortified camp of the Northmen on the river Seine, where there was a struggle fought on foot. When the Northmen saw that those who were with the king, that is, the greatest part of the army, made no effort either to capture their camp or even to dismount, they came out of their camp to fight. After suffering losses the Franks broke off the engagement and laid out their camp in a circular pattern two or three miles away from the camp of the Northmen. Hugh [the Great], the son of Robert, laid out his own camp on the opposite bank of the Seine. Thus from day to day the franks were delaying establishing a close siege of the Northmen's encampment as they awaited ships to come from Paris. However, with the complicity of some of our men, as it is said, the Northmen broke out of their camp and sought the cover of a certain forest to shield their movement and some of our own men returned home.

	When the Lenten fasts were begun, Heribert [count of Vermandois] spoke with Gislebert [of Lotharingia] and then with Hugh [the Great], and then summoned King Raoul from Burgundy. Raoul hurried to meet him and set out for Cambrai in order to meet the Lotharingians and Gislebert. However, these latter ones did not attend the placitum and came to Raoul on the Meuse. Gislebert and Otho were made Raoul's supporters.


Flodoard records that Gislebert and Otho were "made Raoul's supporters" after this, but apparently they were duplicitous


in same year, records that Henry took one of Gislebert's castles:

	
	...Finally Henry [king of Germany] crossed the Rhine and took by storm the oppidum of Ziilpich, which was defended by Gislebert's jideles. Henry did not remain log in Lothair's Kingdom, but after taking hostages from Gislebert he returned home across the Rhine.


in 931, records that Gislebert "withdrew his allegiance" from King Raoul due to Emma taking a castle from him, and started attacking Boso, who renounced allegiance from Henry and went to Raoul and both started attacking castles. Heribert sided with Gislebert and Kin Raoul came back and started attacking Heribert's castles for deserting. Heribert was joined by Lotharingians "due to the efforts of Duke Gislebert" against Raoul"


	...Gislebert, the son of Manasses, withdrew his allegience from King Raoul because Queen Emma had taken away from him the castrum of Avvalon. Likewise Richard, the son of Warnerius, defected for the same reason. Similarly, a conflict arose between Gislebert the Lotharingian and Boso [the brother of King Raoul], and Boso made a peace pact with Heribert [of Vermandois]. Boso's castrum of Durofostum was captured by Gislebert, and at the same time the munitio of Mortagne-due-Nord which belonged to the sons of Roger [of Laon], was taken by Arnulf, Baldwin's son. Heribert accepted the friendship of Gislebert the Lotharingian. Boso, having renounced his allegience to Henry [king of Germany], went to King Raoul. Boso then returned to the castrum of Chalons-sur-Marne and captured it by force. He then set it on fire and destroyed it. There was due to the hostility of Bishop Bovo of Calons, whose men had lopped off limbs of some of Boso's men. King Raoul retruned to Francia. Because Count Heribert had deserted from him, the king and Hugh [the Great] captured and destroyed Heribert's castellum of Denain. Next the king besieged Arras. Count Heribert, who was joined by the Lotharingians due to the efforts of Duke Gislebert, advanced against the king. However, both sides departed after agreeing to a truce that was to last until the first day of October.


Writes Raoul continued attacks on Gislebert and Lotharingians in 932, and Hugh the White invited Gislebert to besiege Peronne then mediated betwen Gislebert and Raoul:


	...In the year 932, King Raoul returned to Burgundy and recaptured some castella that belonged to Gislebert and Richard, who had deserted him.

	...[Duke] Gislebert, at the invitation of Hugh [the Great], besieged Peronne with the Lotharingians. Many Lotharingians died in the frequent encounters and the remaining Lotharingians, unable to take the minitio, withdrew after Hugh mediated a conference between Duke Gislebert and King Raoul. King Raul and Hugh [the Great] placed under seige Heribert's castellum of Ham.


In 934 records that Henry sent Gislebert and Ebrardus along with some Lotharingian bishops on behalf of Heribert after Raoul and Hugh seiged Chateau-Theirry and made a deal that Raul gets Chateau-Theirry and Heribert gets Ham and Peronne for awhile:


	...King Raoul and Hugh [the Great] resumed the siege [of Chateau-Thierry], when the hostages that they had given Heribert [of Vermandois] had been neglected.

	Henry [king of Germany] sent [Duke] Gislebert [of Lotharingia] and [Count] Ebrardus [of Franconia], along with the bishops of Lothair's Kingdom, to King Raoul on behalf of Heribert. Chateau-Thierry was returned to the king and Ham and Peronne were conceded to Heribert until 1 October. 


In same year, records that Gislebert was going to help Heribert with some Lotharingians to take St-Quentin, but Hugh the White envoys stopped them and made a peace deal:


	...	Gislebert and the Lotharingians came into Francia to assist Heribert [of Vermandois], who was about to besiege the oppidum of St-Quentin. However, before he had reached it, envoys of Hugh [the Great] came and met with him, and when oaths were given on both sides, they made peace between Hugh [the Great] and Heribert [of Vermandois] that was to last until the month of May. The Lotharingians then returned home.


In 938, records that Gislebert and Lotharingians joined up with Hugh the White and heribert against King Louis and took Pierrepont:


	...[Duke] Gislebert and the Lotharingians came to Hugh [the Great] and Heribert to assist them against King Louis, and they captured by force the castrum of Pierrepont. 


In 939, records that Lotharingians thought of Otto as their King, but deserted hind came to King Louis, who had a "firm friendship" with King Otto. Giselbert and other Lotharingian nobles likewise committed themselves to Louis. Otto then crossed into Lotharingia and devastated many areas by fire and pillaging:


	...The Lotharingians deserted their king Otto and came to King Louis, who delayed receiving them because of the firm friendship between the two kings, which had been arranged by he legates of this Otto [I, king of Germany] and of Count Arnulf [of Flanders].

	...	Likewise the Lotharingians came to King Louis and the magnates (proceres) of the Lotharingian kingdom, namely Duke Gislebert and the counts Otho [of Verdun], Isaac [of Cambrai] and Theoderic [of Holland], and committed themselves to Louis. However, the bishops delayed committing themselves to the King Louis because King Otto was holding their hostages with him. King Otto crossed the Rhine and passed through the Lotharingian kingdom, devastating many places by fire and pillaging.


In the same year, Flodoard records that Gislebert was chased by some Saxons then jumped into a river and died. King Louis then married Gislebert's widow, Otto's sister Gerberga:


	...	Duke Gislebert of the Lotharingians set out raiding across the Rhine and was returning with the Saxons in pursuit. He jumped into the Rhine with his horse and was killed by the force of the water. His body was never found but it was said that fishermen discovered the corpse of a man, which was buried and concealed because of his equipment.

	King Louis returned to the Lotharingian kingdom and married Gerberga, the widow of Giselbert, that is, the sister of King Otto



Widukind writes that a man named "Christian" captured Gislebert at some point and brought him to Henry seeking his good graces. Says that Henry thought "only through him that he could gain possession of the whole kingdom of Lothar", treated him generously, arranged for him to marry his sister and built-up an ally in Gislebert.

This explains why Gislebert was acting with "inconstance", messing everything up, starting fights and switching sides--end effect of Gislebert was getting Charles and Raoul fighting Lotharingians constantly and other nobles fighting each other. Might say something about his death too--after Gislebert and Lotharingians switched to Louis, Gislebert was "chased by some Saxons" and died.

Gislebert also helped stop Raoul from defeating Normans, and Flodaord's 922 entry suggest Charles' fights against Gislebert in Lotharingia made him unpopular. Henry's strategy to take Lotharingia by "arte" apparently involved keeping French from gaining advantage against outside invaders like vikings, destroying France in civil war and making French kings unpopular because of it.


What does Widukind mean that Giselbert was "born of an ancient and noble kin"?


...


	(31) His most noble and extraordinarily wise queen, who was called Matilda, bore him other children. The first born, the wonder of the world, was called Otto, the second, who was distinguished by his father’s name Henry, was a brave and energetic man, while the third son, was called Bruno. 12 We have seen him exercising the offices of archbishop and duke. No one should say that he was wrong to do this, since we have read that the holy Samuel and many other priests acted at the same time as judges. She also bore another daughter, who married Duke Hugh. 13 This lady, the queen, was the daughter of Dietrich, whose brothers were Widukind, Immed and Reginbern. 14 Reginbern was the man who fought against the Danes, who had many times ravaged Saxony, and defeated them, freeing the fatherland from their raids right up to the present day. 15 They were of the kin of the great duke Widukind, a powerful man who waged war against Charlemagne for almost thirty years.

	...13 Hedwig, who married Duke Hugh of Francia in 937: he died 956, she died after 958


Widukind apparently cares a lot about family and kin, talking about Saxon heroes in Matildia's family

"Duke Hugh" who married Henry's daughter is "Hugh the White" (or "Hugh the Great"), who also sometimes helped fuck things up in France along with Gislebert

Hugh's father was also the guy who dicked over Charles and sided with Rollo


...


	(32) After these internal conflicts had died down, the Hungarians once again rode all over Saxony, consigning cities and towns to the flames, and committing such slaughter that they threatened to depopulate it completely. The king was guarding a city called Werla, for he did not trust his soldiers, ill-trained and unused to open warfare, [to resist] such a savage people. The latter caused such destruction at that time, and burned so many monasteries, that we have judged it better to stay silent rather than recount our calamities in detail. However, it chanced that one of the leaders of the Hungarians was captured, and brought in chains to the king. The Hungarians held him in such high regard that they offered a great quantity of gold and silver for his ransom. The king spurned the gold but rather sought peace, which after a time he secured; a nine-years’ peace was agreed in return for the restoration of the prisoner and other gifts. [924] …


I guess more Henry using "arte" to get peace with Hungarians (or Magyars)

actually a good lesson for Matilda, go for peace for kingdom instead of gold for yourself

missing sections 33-34


	(35) Therefore King Henry, after he had been granted peace by the Hungarians for nine years, took such great care to guard his homeland and to attack barbarous nations that it is beyond our powers to describe it fully, although one ought not to pass everything over in silence. First, he selected one man out of every nine soldier- farmers [agrarii milites] to dwell in the towns where he would prepare accommodation for his eight companions, and he would receive and be supported by a third part of all their crops. The remaining eight would sow and reap and collect the fruits, and would store them in their homes for themselves and the ninth man. He desired that councils and all gatherings and feasts take place in the towns, in the building of which they worked day and night, so that they could become familiar with peace, but that in an emergency they could use [the walls] against an enemy. There were few if any walls outside these towns. And after he had accustomed the people (cives) to such a way of life, then he launched a sudden attack against the Hevelli, 16 wore them down with many battles, and finally in the depths of winter placed siege- camps outside the ramparts of the town of Brandenburg and captured it through hunger and cold, as well as iron. And after he had acquired the whole region along with that town, he turned his banners against the land of the Dalminzier, against which his father had once entrusted him with a campaign, and besieging the city that is called Jahna, he finally captured it on the twentieth day. The plunder from the town was given to his soldiers, all the adults were slain, and the boys and girls were kept as captives. After this he and his whole army went to Prague, and he received the surrender of this town of the Bohemians and its king. Certain miraculous deeds are told concerning the latter, but since we have no proof of these, we consider that they should be hidden in silence. However, his brother Boleslav remained faithful to the emperor as long as he lived and continued to be useful to him. Thus after making the Bohemians pay tribute to him, the king returned to Saxony.


after peace with Hungarians, says Henry attacked "barbarous nations that it is beyond our powers to describe it fully"


	...although one ought not to pass everything over in silence.

	...Certain miraculous deeds are told concerning the latter, but since we have no proof of these, we consider that they should be hidden in silence.


comes off secretive

which are the nations he attacked? names Hevelli and Dalminzier and Bohemians, capturing Jahna and Prague

some of what he describes if pretty brutal

"finally in the depths of winter placed siege- camps outside the ramparts of the town of Brandenburg and captured it through hunger and cold, as well as iron"

"The plunder from the town was given to his soldiers, all the adults were slain, and the boys and girls were kept as captives."

	
	...After this he and his whole army went to Prague, and he received the surrender of this town of the Bohemians and its king.

	...his brother Boleslav remained faithful to the emperor as long as he lived and continued to be useful to him. Thus after making the Bohemians pay tribute to him


Machiavellian before Machiavelli


what is the lesson here to Matilda?


...

	
	36) After the neighbouring peoples, the Abrodites, Wiltzi, Hevelli, Dalminzier, Bohemians and Redarii, had been made tributaries by King Henry, there was peace. The Redarii [then] broke faith, and after assembling a great multitude they made an attack on a fortress called Walsleben. They took it and captured and killed all its inhabitants, of whom there were a great number. Once this had happened, all the barbarian nations once again dared to rise in rebellion. To repress the ferocity of these peoples an army was entrusted to Bernhard, to whom authority over the province of the Redarii had been granted, along with a force of crack troops. 17 Thietmar was appointed as his fellow commander, 18 and they were ordered to besiege a town called Lenzen. 19 On the fifth day of the siege scouts arrived with the news that an army of barbarians was not far away, and that they intended to attack the camp during the next night. Since a number of people confirmed this report, our people gave faith to these words. Our men assembled around the commander’s tent, and he and his deputy immediately ordered them to remain on guard throughout the night, in case the barbarians should launch an assault on the camp. When the multitude had been dismissed, there was both joy and sorrow in the camp; some fearing battle and others looking forward to it, and depending on their character the warriors wavered between hope and fear. 20 Meanwhile the day ended, and the night was darker than usual, while the rain poured down, thwarting through Divine providence the evil intentions of the barbarians. As they had been ordered, the Saxons stood to arms the whole night, and at dawn, after receiving the sacrament, they promised under oath first to their commanders and then to each other to render their assistance to their comrades in the coming battle. When the sun rose – for after the rain the day was clear and peaceful – they raised their banners and marched out of the camp. 21 First of all, the commander launched an attack on the barbarians, but since he only had a few men [with him] they were unable to prevail against the large number [of their foes], and so he withdrew back to the main body of the army, reporting that the barbarians did not have many horsemen, but they had a vast force of infantry. The latter were, however, so hampered by the overnight rain that they could scarcely be forced by the horsemen to march into battle. 22 The sun shone on the damp clothing of the barbarians, making steam rise up to Heaven, giving hope and confidence to the people of God, whose faces shone with determination and serenity. Thus once the signal was given, and with the commander encouraging his troops, they charged the enemy with mighty battle cries. Although they could not drive right through the enemy because of the density of the latter’s army, they ranged from right to left with their swords, and whenever they cut off any of the enemy from their fellows, they put them to death. As the battle had now reached a climax, and many had fallen on all sides, and still the barbarians held their ranks, the general asked his fellow commander to come to his assistance with his squadrons. He therefore sent a captain (prefectus) with fifty men-at-arms to attack the enemy from the flank, who broke through their ranks. As a result the enemy fled, and the slaughter continued all day. Since they were being cut down as they fled through the open fields, they tried to run to the nearby town, but Thietmar prevented this, and [forced them] into a nearby lake. So it came to pass that all of this great host either perished by the sword or drowned in the lake. None of the infantry survived, and very few of the horsemen, and so the battle ended in the complete destruction of all their enemies. There was, meanwhile, great rejoicing over this victory; everyone praised the leaders, while every one of the soldiers congratulated each other, even the unworthy ones, as is usually the case when things go well. 23 Early the next morning they carried their banners to the aforesaid town, where the inhabitants (urbani) threw down their weapons and begged for quarter, which they were granted. They were ordered to leave the town unarmed, but those of servile condition, all the money, their wives and children, and all the baggage of the king of the barbarians were made captive. On our side, however, two men called Lothar and a handful of other noblemen fell. 24 Thus the commander and his colleague and the other nobles returned to Saxony where they were greeted with honour by the king and greatly praised for securing this mighty victory with a small force and the favour of Divine clemency. For there were those who said that two hundred thousand barbarians had died. The next day all the prisoners were beheaded, as they had been warned [to expect].


Widukind thinking about what's going on the the heads of soldiers and morale and apparently wants Matilda to think about that too. Signs of elitism in this passage--some people "savages", some of their soldiers "unworthy" and some not, some people "noble". I guess a lesson in morale, scouting, and planning ahead in warfare.


	...(37) A royal marriage now increased the joy caused by the recent victory. The
	nuptials were celebrated at this time on a lavish scale, for the king gave as wife to his
	son Otto the daughter of King Edmund of the English, the sister of Aethelstan. 25 She
	bore him a son called Liudolf, a great man who was rightly dear to all the people, and
	a daughter called Liudgarda, who married Conrad, Duke of the Franconians.


ties between King Aethelstan and the Ottonians? In 939 Flodoard records that he promised to Louis help when Otto attacked Lotharingia, but pillaged the coast of Flanders and left instead.


...


	(38) The king now had an army ready for a battle on horseback, and so he dared to begin a campaign against his old enemies, the Hungarians. He summoned all the people and addressed them as follows. ‘You all know very well that your kingdom was once in the grip of anarchy, and from how many dangers it has [now] been freed, for you are the ones who have many times suffered from civil discord and external attack. But now through God’s favour to us, and through your efforts and courage, you have secured peace and unity, and the barbarians have been overcome and reduced to submission. [Now] we face a further challenge – we must rise up together against our common enemy, the Avars. 27 I have until now despoiled you and your sons and daughters, and I have filled their treasuries. Now I shall be forced to plunder the churches and the priests of these churches, for we have no money left to us, [indeed] nothing apart from our bare bodies. Therefore discuss among yourselves and decide what we should do in this matter. Shall I seize the treasury that has been dedicated for the service of God and give this to the enemies of God for our ransom? Or should I rather leave that money to the Divine service, that we may instead be redeemed by Him who is indeed both our Creator and our Redeemer?’

	At this, the people raised their voices to Heaven, saying that they wanted absolutely to be redeemed by the living and true God, since He is faithful and ‘righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works’. 28 They then raised their right hands on high and promised their assistance to the king against this most savage people, and he confirmed this agreement.


According to Widukind, King Henry asked his people: "do you think we should plunder the church for more money and get some from the Hungarians?" and they all raised up their right hands and said God is great and lets attack these savage people

Apparently Henry was popular because the kingdom was divided before and he united it (why was it divided before? how did it get united?)

Widukind's account of Henry's speech illustrates some rhetorical tricks: remind people why they should like you, make your decisions seem like their decisions (starts off that Henry decided to attack Hungary then put it to the people), pit public against common enemy, appeal to people by giving them spoils (apparently through plunder)


	After this envoys from the Hungarians came to the king for the customary gifts, but he sent them away and they left his land empty-handed. Once they learned of this, the Avars did not hesitate but hastened to invade Saxony with a strong and fierce band.


try to get enemy to attack you first if you want to invade (e.g. Hitler dressing people up in Polish uniforms)


	Journeying through the land of the Dalminzier, they sought the aid of these old friends of theirs. 29 However, the latter knew that they were hastening against Saxony, and that the Saxons were prepared to fight them, so they threw them a very fat dog as a ‘present’. Hurrying as they were to another battle, this was not the moment to seek revenge for this insult, so the Hungarians merely continued for a long time to make a quite ridiculous fuss about this to their ‘friends’. They then launched the most sudden invasion of Thuringia that they could manage, and raided throughout that land. Some rode to the west with their various allied forces, seeking to enter Saxony from both the west and south. But the Saxons and the Thuringians mustered together and joined battle with them. They killed the leaders of the western army and forced the rest of their men to scatter throughout that region, where some of them died of hunger, others perished from cold, and the rest were killed or captured, as served them right.

	The army which remained in the east heard that the king’s sister, born of a concubine, who had married Wido of Thuringia, was living in a nearby town, and that there was a great deal of gold and silver treasure there. So they started to attack the town so strongly that if night had not come and hindered the warriors’ vision, they would have taken it. That night they heard that the king and his companions were advancing against them with a powerful army – for the king had camped at a place called Riade. They were struck with fear, and as was their custom abandoned their own camp to smoke and flames, gathering together in a great but confused column. The next day the king led out his army, urging them to put all their trust in the Divine Clemency; they had no doubt that God would help them, as he had in other battles. They considered the Hungarians to be the common enemies of all, and they wanted to take revenge for their homeland and their relatives, while they thought that the enemy would soon turn tail if they continued to fight him manfully. 


trust in God, get revenge, fight like a man

does this reflect ideas among German public too?


	After encouraging his army with these words, the ruler took his station in their midst, ‘moving everywhere before, behind and in the thick of the action’. 30 They saw that an angel was with him, for this word and image was inscribed upon his banner, and they took heart and great constancy. 31 The king was indeed worried about what might happen – that the enemy would see his armoured knights and immediately take flight. So he sent the Thuringian detachment with a small band of knights to chase the unprotected enemy and drive them towards his own army. This was what happened, but none the less they fled when they saw his armoured troops. They were pursued for eight miles, and almost all of them were killed or captured. The fortresses that had been taken were recovered, and all the captives were set free.


this wraps up everything on Henry in these excerpts, probably most of it


...


https://www.leeds.ac.uk/arts/download/1965/the_deeds_of_the_saxons_by_widukind_of_korvey
	Book II
	[Otto I becomes king]


Otto was crowned 936


	(1) After the death of Henry, the father of his country and the greatest and best of kings, all the people of the Franks and Saxons chose as their prince his son Otto, who had already been designated as king by his father. They ordered the nobles to assemble at the palace at Aachen, the place of universal election. This place is close to Jüllich, named after its founder Julius Caesar. 



entry in Flodoard's Annals:


https://books.google.com/books?id=OpsTS-E_pFgC&
	The king and Hugh [the Great] proceeded into Burgundy and laid siege to the urbs of the Langres, which had been seized by Hugh [the Black], King Raoul's brother. Louis and Hugh took the city without fighting when the garrison fled. They then went to Paris after they recieved hostages from the bishops and the magnates (primates) of Burgundy. Because King Henry [of Germany] had died during that time [2 July 936], there arose a conflict over the kingdom among his sons, with the highest position falling to his son Otto, being better by birth.


differ here--Widukind doesn't mention a fight. (although Widukind says upfront he won't mention everything)


https://www.leeds.ac.uk/arts/download/1965/the_deeds_of_the_saxons_by_widukind_of_korvey
	Once they had arrived there, the dukes and leading princes, along with the other leading men among their soldiers, gathered in the portico of the basilica of Charlemagne. They placed their new ruler on a throne that had been set up there, giving him their hands and promising their fealty. Pledging their help against all enemies, they appointed him king according to their custom. While this was being carried out by the dukes and other men of position, the archbishop with all those of the clerical order and all the common people were waiting in the basilica for the procession of the new king. Holding his pastoral staff in his right hand, and clad in his alb, stole and chasuble, he met the king as he entered, touching his right hand with his left, and then led him into the middle of the church where he stood by its banner, and turning to the people who stood all around – for ambulatories had been built both above and below in the rotunda of the church, so that everybody could see clearly. ‘Lo’, he said, ‘I bring to you the man chosen by God and previously designated by the lord Henry, and now Otto has been made king by all the princes; if this election is pleasing to you, show this by raising your right hands to Heaven. At this word all the people raised their right hands on high, loudly praying for the prosperity of their new ruler. Then the archbishop went with the new king, who was wearing a close-fitting tunic in the Frankish style, behind the altar, on which the royal insignia were placed: the sword with its belt, the mantle with the bracelets, and the staff, sceptre and diadem. The archbishop at this time was called Hildebert, a Frank by race and a monk by profession, raised and educated at the monastery of Fulda. 32 He rose through ability to become the father [abbot] of this place, and then he was promoted to the exalted position of archbishop of the see of Mainz. He was a man of extraordinary sanctity, and through his keen intellect was a most distinguished scholar. Among other gifts of Divine grace, he was said to have received the spirit of prophecy. A question had arisen as to which bishop should consecrate the king, whether him or the archbishops of Trier and Cologne – for the former see was the older and had indeed been founded by St. Peter, while the place of coronation lay in the diocese of the latter. However, when they met to decide who should have the honour of performing the coronation, they both decided to defer to Hildebert and allow him the distinction.


Widukind apparently liked archbishop Hildebert of Mainz, who "rose through ability" to become a "distinguished scholar."

Widukind says Hildebert had the divine gift of "the spirit of prophecy"--is some something nobles like Matilda would actually believe?


Thietmar Chronicon says Hidelbert died 2nd year in service, doesn't say anything else about him except that he consecrated Otto: https://books.google.com/books?id=RQFmHxx3tsIC&pg=PA117&lpg=PA117

	
	He therefore went to the altar, and took the sword and its belt; then turning to the king he said: ‘Receive this sword, with which you may drive out all the enemies of Christ, both barbarians and bad Christians, through the Divine authority handed down to you with all the power over the empire of the Franks, to provide the most lasting peace for all Christians’. Then taking the bracelets and the cloak, he clothed him with them, saying: ‘The corners [of the mantle] trailing on the ground will remind you with what zealous faith you should burn, and that you ought to continue to promote peace up to your end’. Then he took the sceptre and staff. ‘These symbols’, he said, ‘are a reminder that you may correct your subjects with paternal castigation, but above all you should extend the hand of mercy to the ministers of God, and widows and orphans. And never let the oil of mercy be absent from your head, so that you may be crowned with eternal reward, both now and in the future’. Archbishops Hildebert and Wichfrid 33 then anointed him with holy oil and crowned him with the golden diadem. Once all the coronation rites were completed, the king was led by the two prelates to the throne, up to which he climbed by a spiral staircase. This had been constructed between two marble columns of wonderful beauty, and from there the king could see, and be seen, by everybody. 


crowning sounds like an ego trip

describing ceremonies takes up a good chunk of the book--why?


...


	...(3) Meanwhile the barbarians were in uproar, striving after new things. Boleslav attacked his brother, a Christian who was, so they say, utterly devoted to the service of God, for he feared to have him nearby as a sub-king, because he was subject to the orders of the Saxons, and so he made war against him. 37 The latter sent messages to Saxony asking for help. Asic was sent to him with the squadron [legio] from Merseburg and a strong force from the Hassegau, to which was added the army of the Thuringians. This squadron had been raised from thieves, for King Henry, while very stern towards foreigners, was merciful in all cases that concerned citizens; thus when he saw some criminal or thief who was strong of arm and suitable for war, he spared him the penalty that he merited, and stationed him in the outskirts of Merseburg, giving him land and arms. He ordered these people to spare the citizens, but to exercise their talent for theft, insofar as they dared, against the barbarians. Having collected a host of men of this sort, he had produced a full squadron for this expedition. Hearing of the Saxon army, and learning that the Saxons and Thuringians were marching against him in two separate armies, Boleslav, who was a very shrewd man, divided his forces and decided to confront each army individually. When the Thuringians saw their enemies attacking them unexpectedly, they saved themselves from danger by flight. Asic with the Saxons and other allies made no delay in charging their enemies and put the greater part of them to the sword, forcing the rest to flee, and they then returned victorious to their camp. But since they knew nothing of the army that had pursued the Thuringians, they took no precautions after securing their victory. Seeing our army scattered, with some men occupied taking plunder from the slain, others taking bodily refreshment, while still others were busy exercising their horses, Boleslav gathered those who had fled and mustered his army, and then suddenly attacked those who confident in their recent victory were completely unprepared, and he destroyed our whole army, along with its leader. He then marched to the town of the sub-king, stormed it with the first assault, and it remains a scene of desolation up to the present day. This war lasted until the fourteenth year of the king’s reign; [the sub-king] remained a faithful and useful servant to the king.


Boleslav apparently stopped being loyal to Ottonians and attacked his brother who was their ally

Otto would catch theives and instead of putting them in jail put them in special thief army

I guess some interesting King tactics in here

would Matilda read this and prompt questions to her dad? see what she's interested in

here Widukind describes a military failure because two armies weren't communicating and one wasn't paying attention

I guess another lesson is help your allies since the sub king "remained a faithful and useful servant to the king"

Matilda's reaction to this might have told them something--if disgusted, I guess not cut out for the work they had in mind for her


...


	...(4) The king was informed of what had happened by a messenger. He was in no way disturbed, but strengthened by Divine courage invaded the lands of the barbarians with the intention of repressing their savagery. His father had indeed previously waged war against them, because they had harmed the envoys of his son Thankmar, about whom we shall choose to say more in the following pages. It was also pleasing to the new king to appoint a new military commander. He chose for this office a man who was noble, energetic and very shrewd called Herman. 38 But by gaining this honour the latter not only incited envy from the other princes but also from his own brother, Wichmann. Because of this, the latter feigned illness and deserted the army. Wichmann was a brave and powerful man, experienced and very knowledgeable in military matters, about which his subordinates claimed that he knew more than anybody else. Herman led from the front during the invasion of this region, began the fight against the enemy and soundly defeated them; by doing this he aroused even more jealousy among his enemies. Among these was Ekkehard son of Liudulf, who resented Herman’s good fortune so much that he vowed to accomplish even greater deeds himself or die in the attempt. So mustering the bravest men from the whole army, he broke the king’s prohibition and with his companions crossed the marsh that lay between the enemy town and the royal camp, and immediately attacked the enemy. However, the latter surrounded them, and he and all his men perished. Eighteen of the best men from the whole army fell with him. However, the king slew a multitude of the enemy, and making the rest of them pay tribute to him he returned to Saxony. These events took place on 25 th September [936].


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otto_I,_Holy_Roman_Emperor
	In the early summer of 951, before his father marched across the Alps, Otto's son Liudolf, Duke of Swabia, invaded Lombardy in northern Italy.[55][d] The exact reasons for Liudolf's action are unclear, and historians have proposed several possible motives.


pretty sure Widukind naming a different Liudolf here

But apparently this happened before--a general just takes an army and goes off with it. Widukind chalked it up to jealously on Ekkehard's part.

I guess the lesson for Matilda here is to watch out for rivalries among generals and not play favorites, don't get mad when you lose badly but be "stengthened by Divine courage"


	(5) After this our old enemies the Hungarians came to ascertain the resolution of the new king. Entering Franconia, they intended, if they could, to invade Saxony from the west. However, once the king heard of this he made no delay. He encountered them with a very strong army, put them to flight and drove them away from his frontiers.


Flodoard records a Magyar invasion of Francia in 937:


	...	A part of the sky seemed to be burning and afterwards there was an invasion of Francia by the Magyars from that direction, with villae and fields laid waste, houses and bascilias burned, and large number of captives led away. However, although they tried to set fire to many other churches they were not able to do so.


for this one he recounts three miraculous stories: that a Mgyar's hand got stuck to an altar and had to be chisled out, that a bishop heard a vision and escaped from leg irons from Magyars, and that a bunch of Magyars shot arrows at a Monk and tried to hit him with a sword which did nothing and thought he was a god.

guess this invasion was important to church?


Flodoard next records in 950 on Otto and Magyars:


	...King Otto [of Germany] laid siege to Prague, the great urbs of the Wends. He received their king in subjection and made the Magyars submit to him.


so by this war with Magyar's lasted for at least 13 years, or went on and off


https://www.leeds.ac.uk/arts/download/1965/the_deeds_of_the_saxons_by_widukind_of_korvey
	(6) However, as these external wars ceased, civil conflicts began to stir. For once the Saxons had been made glorious by the rule of their king, they disdained to serve governors from any other nation. Thus the angry Eberhard 39 raised an army to attack Bruning, and consigned a town of his called Hellmern to the flames, killing all its inhabitants. On hearing of this presumption, the king condemned Eberhard to a fine of horses worth a hundred talents, and all the leaders of the knights who had assisted him in [carrying out] this crime to the ‘shame of dogs’, which they carried to the royal city that we call Magdeburg. 40


says that Eberhard was angry that Saxons were gloriously united under Otto instead of listening to him and attacked Bruning and burnt down Hellmern. Otto shamed Eberhard and his followers.

this says Eberhard was involved in a few rebellions against Otto: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eberhard_of_Franconia

in 1919 says he had a shot at being the King of Germany, Henry elected instead, was loyal to Henry and ruled Lotharingia before Giselbert until 928.

	
	...Eberhard was ordered to pay a fine and his lieutenants were sentenced to carry dead dogs in public, a particularly dishonouring punishment. Infuriated, Eberhard joined Otto's opponents, raising a rebellion in 938 with Otto's half-brother Thankmar and the new Duke Eberhard of Bavaria, the late Duke Arnulf's son. The revolt was soon suppressed; Thankmar was assassinated at Eresburg Castle, and Eberhard of Bavaria was replaced by his uncle Berthold as duke (ruled 938–945).

	Following a brief reconciliation with King Otto, Eberhard then allied himself with Duke Gilbert of Lorraine, Archbishop Frederick of Mainz, and Henry, Otto's younger brother, in a new uprising. Their united forces posed a serious threat to Otto's rule; nevertheless, on 2 October 939, the rebels were finally defeated in the Battle of Andernach.


939 was when Flodoard records Giselbert and Lothoringians deserted Henry and attacked him

a lot of stuff was happening this time according to Flodoard: King Louis attacked William Longsword, Heribert and William had been excommunicated, Lotharingians including Gislebert and other nobles deserted Henry for Louis, vikings and a guy named Erlunius fighting Arnulf, Otto crosses Rhine and pillages Lotharingia, English come to help Louis, question of bishops switching sides in the air but they delay, and some Otto "fidles" flee across Rhine and side with Louis.

But English plunder Flanders and go home instead, Giselbert dies and Louis marries Otto's sister, and "King Otto returned into the Lotharingian kingdom and forced almost all of the Lotharingians to return to him."

sounds like a coup that didn't work. Apparently this coup was pretty far-reaching.

...


https://www.leeds.ac.uk/arts/download/1965/the_deeds_of_the_saxons_by_widukind_of_korvey
	(7) At this time the king brought the relics of the martyr Innocent to this same city. This king was a man of great clemency, who after he had inflicted this deserved punishment on the disturbers of the peace, then received [them] with piety, and bestowing a royal gift upon each and every one of them sent them away in peace. Nevertheless, they remained loyal to their duke [and supported him] in every crime, for he was indeed cheerful of spirit, kindly to his inferiors, generous in giving, and because of this he gained the loyalty of many Saxons.


Widukind says Otto was pious and gracious to Eberhard, but Eberhard kept support because he was cheerful in spirit and kindly and generous to his inferiors (another lesson?)


	(8) Duke Arnulf of the Bavarians died at this time, and his sons, puffed up with pride, ignored the king’s command to join his army. 41


Duke Arnulf sons also acting rebellious against Otto


	(9) At that same time Count Siegfried died. Although Thankmar claimed his position, because he was closely related to him – for his mother was the daughter of Siegfried’s maternal aunt, and from her King Henry engendered Thankmar – the king granted this post to Count Gero, and Thankmar was afflicted with great sadness. 42 The king, meanwhile, journeyed into Bavaria, and having settled matters there in an appropriate way he returned to Saxony.


background on Thankmar and family feud caused by Otto appointment:


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thankmar
	Thankmar (or Tammo) (c. 908 – 28 July 938) was the eldest (and only) son of Henry I of Germany by his first wife, Hatheburg of Merseburg (or Liutgard). His mother had been previously married and widowed, after which she entered a convent. Because she left the convent to marry Henry, her second marriage was considered invalid and the couple split. Thankmar's legitimacy was, therefore, in question.

	In 929, Henry I arranged for his succession and had the arrangement ratified by an assembly at Erfurt, just before his death. After his death, his lands and wealth were divided between his four sons: Thankmar, Otto, Henry, and Bruno.[1] Otto, however, was designated by his father to receive the crown. The only succession dispute was between Otto and his younger full brother Henry, who was kept under house arrest in Bavaria during Otto's coronation.[2]

	After the death of his cousin, Siegfried, Count of Merseburg (they were related in the maternal line), in 937, Thankmar claimed Merseburg.[3] Otto, however, appointed Gero, Siegfried's brother.[3] During this dispute, Eberhard of Franconia and Wichmann the Elder revolted against Otto and Thankmar joined them. Later, Thankmar was besieged in Eresburg. He was killed by a spear thrown through the window of the church of Saint Peter, while he was seeking refuge inside.[4]



https://www.leeds.ac.uk/arts/download/1965/the_deeds_of_the_saxons_by_widukind_of_korvey
	(10) The dispute that had occurred between Eberhard and Bruning reached such intensity that there was great slaughter, the countryside was depopulated, and both sides resorted to arson. There was also argument over various of the laws, and there were those who said that since the sons of sons ought not to be counted among the sons who were lawfully to be recognised as heirs with the [surviving] sons, if their own fathers had died while their grandfathers were still alive. In consequence an edict was issued by the king, that a gathering of the whole people should take place at a village called Steele, 43 where this issue would be investigated and would be judged by arbiters. But after taking better advice, the king was reluctant for the noblemen and elders among the people to be shamed [by this], and so he ordered rather that this matter be settled through champions. The winning side was the one which considered the sons of sons among the sons, and it was decreed that these [grandsons] should in perpetuity divide an inheritance equally with their uncles. There also those who breached the peace were publicly charged. Up until then they had denied that they had done anything contrary to royal authority, claiming rather that they had only avenged an injury against those connected with them (in socios). The king, however, believed that he was held in contempt by them – for they did not deign to attend his court hearing, as they had been ordered to do – he took away their arms, and appointed a place of pardon, for he it was always his custom to resort to clemency. But this delay encouraged many people to greater evildoing. Moreover, many dreadful deeds were done by the rebels: killings, perjury, ravaging, arson and others equally wicked. Not the least of the sins they committed in these days was holy perjury.


Widukind says Eeberhard rebellion came to boil (I think around 937?) and "countryside was depopulated." At this time there was also dispute about rules for inheritance. Otto made edict saying to put it to a committee, but he got "better advice" and became reluctunt that the nobles might be shamed by this and ordered it settled by "champions".

What is lesson here, that "trial by ideal" better than "trial by arbiter"? Church would get involved in this later.

I think Widukind is saying the losers of this trial came in conflict with Otto and the "rebels" did much evildoing


	(11) Thankmar was joined by Eberhard, and after gathering a strong force of troops they stormed a fortress called Belecke, 44 in which Henry the younger was staying. After giving the booty from this town to his fellow-warriors, he set off with them, taking Henry along with him as though he was his slave. 


apparently Thankmar rebelled after this and joined Eberhard in rebellion. They took Henry with them, Widukind says "as though he was his slave."


	Gebhard son of Otto, the brother of Duke Hermann, was killed there. His death led, through God who ordains everything, to internal division among the Franconian ducal family.


Widukind says God ordained internal division among rebels from Gebhard's death

Does he actually believe that? He can read the bible but seems to care a lot more about politics and himself ordains things like "taking Lothoringia by arte" and "slaying all of the adults" in a city so king can "be useful" to them. He sounds evil. Suspicious that "it was God" sometimes means "it was us playing more political tricks."


	45 So great were the spoils that Thankmar’s warriors were now furnished with everything that they needed. After this, he captured a town called Obermarsburg, and he remained there, gathering a mighty host and launching many raids. Eberhard kept Henry with him. Dedi was killed at this time outside the gates of a town called Larun, which was garrisoned by some knights of Eberhard. 46 However, when Wichmann, who had previously deserted the king, heard of the terrible crimes of the rebels, he changed sides and made his peace with the king, for he was a most shrewd man, and he remained useful and faithful to the end.


this rebellion probably big deal, Otto got some help from Whichmann who had previously deserted Otto then switched back when rebellion heated up


	Thankmar, the son of King Henry, had been born of a noble mother; he was an energetic man, of fierce disposition, and skilled in warlike matters, but showing little restraint in the conduct of open warfare. His mother had extensive property; and although he had been endowed with many other possessions by his father, he took it very ill that he had been deprived of his maternal inheritance. 47 It was for this reason that he took up arms against his lord the king, which led to the ruin of both him and his men. Realising that the situation was becoming extremely dangerous, the king, albeit reluctantly, decided to tame Thankmar’s insolence and marched against Obermarsburg with a substantial army. When the inhabitants of that town realised that the king was approaching them with a powerful force, they opened the gates to the army that was laying siege to the town. Thankmar fled to the church that had been dedicated to Blessed Peter the Apostle by Pope Leo. 48 The army pursued him to the church, and in particular the followers of Henry, who lamented and sought to avenge the injury to their lord. Nor did they hesitate to break down the doors and come armed into the sacred building. Thankmar stood next to the altar, on which he had placed his weapons and a golden torque. And as missiles were launched from the other side, a man called Thiatbold, the bastard son of Cobbo, wounded Thankmar and shouted insults at him, while he received a wound from Thankmar that with dreadful fury cut short his life. However, one of the knights, called Mancia, 49 stabbed him in the back with a spear from a window next to the altar, and it was there, next to the altar, that Thankmar breathed his last. 50 This profiteer from fraternal discord later miserably lost his life at Birten, along with the gold that he had wickedly stolen from the altar.


the church apparently wanted Thankmar alive. I guess admired his energy and "fierce disposition," blamed his death on Henry supporters (Henry being brother of Otto who contested the throne)


	The king was not present and knew nothing about this. When he was informed, he disapproved of the rash action of these knights, but with civil war still raging he could not be sad [about what had happened]. He lamented his brother’s ill-fortune, showing the clemency of his disposition, although he deliberately said little in praise of him. Following Frankish law, he had Thiadric and the three sons of his aunt condemned to death by hanging. Then he led to his army, which was eager for battle and [already] furnished with the booty from this town [Obermarsburg] towards Laar [Laër]. The people of this town, led by their governor, resisted fiercely, and unceasingly responded by throwing stones in return for stones and missiles for missiles, but [eventually] exhausted by this war on behalf of the duke they requested a truce. Once this was granted, the ducal garrison was denied to them. 51 Once this had left, they surrendered themselves to the king’s authority. Tammo the butler, who was already famous for many other fine deeds, distinguished himself in this battle. When Eberhard heard of the death of Thankmar and the defection of his knights, his resolve broke. He flung himself before his prisoner and sought pardon, and the latter made him some wrongful promises.

	(12) Henry was at this time still a very young man, daring of spirit, and consumed by a great eagerness to rule. 52 He forgave him through an unlawful agreement that Eberhard would join him in a plot against the king, his lord and brother, by which he would, if it were possible, seize the crown of the kingdom for himself. After striking this deal between them, Henry then returned a free man to the king, and was received by him in a more genuine spirit of trust and love than he himself had on his arrival.

	(13) On the persuasion of that best of men, someone most pleasing in all aspects of religion, Frederick, the successor of Archbishop Hildebert, 53 Eberhard went to the king and humbly begged pardon, surrendering himself completely to the king’s decision. To avoid any continuance of this great and wicked disturbance, he was sent by the king to the city of Hildesheim, as though in exile. But not long afterwards he was clemently received back into the king’s grace and restored to his former position.


Widukind says Eberhard groveled then made a secret deal with Henry to oppose Otto while Henry pretended he was trustworthy, then Eberhard came and groveled some more before Otto who exiled a bit then gave clemency.

What was Eberhards motivation? He's consistent in opposing Otto whenever an opportunity appears. Both him and Henry had a shot at the crown. Later he ended up siding with Louis in what looks like a big coup against Otto. Who organized these?



...


	(14) While these events were taking place, our old enemies the Hungarians suddenly invaded Saxony, and pitching camp on the banks of the River Bode spread out throughout the province. One of their leaders was sent out from the camp with a part of their army, and on the same day moved with his standard around a town called Stederburg. Seeing that the enemy were becoming more sluggish, partly as a result of their journey and also because of the rain, which was very heavy, the townspeople bravely charged out of the gates. First uttering terrifying cries, they then charged their adversaries at speed, killing most of them, capturing a large number of horses and some of their banners, and putting the rest to flight. When the people of the towns that were along their way realised that they were in flight, they attacked them everywhere. The majority of them were slain, and they forced the Hungarian leader into a muddy pit and drowned him. Another part of their army which had gone to the north was led through the cunning of a certain Slav into a place called the Drömling, 54 where surrounded by armed men in very difficult terrain it was annihilated. This filled the rest of the Hungarians with utter terror. However, the leader of that army escaped with a few of his men, but he was captured and brought to the king, and ransomed for a great price. After hearing of this all the enemy camps were greatly disturbed. They sought safety in flight, and did not appear again in Saxony for more than thirty years.


Widukind says while this rebellion was happening, the Hungarians suddenly invaded Saxony but the townspeople charged them, got them to retreat, and drowned their leader in a muddy pit. Another army lead by "the cunning of a certain Slav" got surrounded in difficult terrain and annihilated. This "filled the rest of the Hungarians with utter terror."

poor planning by Hungarians? got routed by townspeople and ambushed in vulnerable terrain.

which battle was this?

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hungarian_invasions_of_Europe
	In 933, a substantial Magyar army appeared in Saxony (the pact with the Saxons having expired) but was defeated by Henry I at Merseburg.[11] Magyar attacks continued against Upper Burgundy (in 935) and against Saxony (in 936).[11] In 937, they raided France as far west as Reims, Lotharingia, Swabia, Franconia, the Duchy of Burgundy[16] and Italy as far as Otranto in the south.[11] They attacked Bulgaria and the Byzantine Empire, reaching the walls of Constantinople. The Byzantines paid them a “tax” for 15 years.[17] In 938, the Magyars repeatedly attacked Saxony.[11]


Hungarian side to the story?

one written by "Anonymus" 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anonymus_(chronicler)

don't know much about him, identity "has always been subject to scholarly debate"


http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/18975/1/18975.pdf
	Five years later, during the reign of Emperor Conrad ...And although they were defeated,they nevertheless beat the victors in courage and valour and laid them low with the mightiest slaughter. Happy thus the rewards of the Hungarians! Now all the safer on account of the dangers they had passed, and the more warlike on account of theconstant mustering, excelling in men and might, they destroyed all Bavaria,Alamannia, Saxony and the realm of Lorraine by fire and the sword, and beheaded their dukes, Erchanger and Bertold.119Setting forth from there, they stormed France and Gaul[Franciam et Galliam], and, as they returned victorious from there, were slain in a great heap by the wiles of the Saxons. Those of them that escaped went homeward.


says after destroying Lorraine and Francia they attacked Saxons, but "were slain in a great heap by the wiles of the Saxons"

when was this? Puts it between 917 and coup against Otto

later sentence in paragraph puts this before 931


	...Of the foes of King Otto

	That year, the foes of King Otto of the Germans plotted his death in a loathsome crime. When they failed to do him any harm, they asked the Hungarians for help because they knew that the Hungarians were insuperable in the usual hardships of war and that God had by the scourge of His wrath [furoris sui flagella] given many realms over to them.

	...Having departed from Duke Zulta, they put once more to the sword Bavaria, Alamannia, Saxony and Thuringia and, proceeding from there, crossed the Rhine dur ing Lent and destroyed the realm of Lorraine [Latariensem] with bows and arrows. Savagely casting down all Gaul [Galliam], they remorselessly entered the churches of God and plundered them.


author apparently a fan of King Otto and Saxons, also sounds a little condescending towards Hungarians

Anonymus says escaping "the wiles of the Saxons" wasn't the last time they attacked Saxony, says attacked and plundered churches after some enemies of Otto paid them off


...


	(15) After this, Henry, burning with desire to rule, prepared a lavish banquet at a place called Saalfeld. And since he was mighty and powerful in majesty and royal power, he gave many gifts to many people, and through plotting of this sort he gained many allies. There were, however, many [others] who wanted the matter to be kept quiet, for they did not wish to create discord between the brothers through this. However, others gave advice through which a war might be opened, namely that he should withdraw from Saxony, leaving a garrison there, and take himself off to the Lotharingarians, an unwarlike race of men. Thus it happened that although the king defeated them at the first attack, he was weakened by this one battle. So after taking the advice of his fellow warriors, Henry left Saxony, as we have said. Leaving garrisons in his towns in the land of Saxony and Thuringia, he went to join his friends in Lotharingia. News of this came as a shock to everyone, since they had been completely ignorant of his secret abandonment of the king and the cause of this sudden conflict. Indeed, when the king was first informed of this he did not believe the news, but afterwards when it was clear that battle was inevitable, he made no delay in setting off after his brother with an army. As he drew near to the town of Dortmund, in which his brother had left a garrison, the soldiers who were there, not unmindful of the fate of Thankmar, did not dare to await the arrival of the king there, but left the town and surrendered to the king. One of these men was Agina, who ought to have administered that town on Henry’s behalf. He was forced by the king to take a binding oath that he would, if he could, persuade his lord to abandon this conflict and return to peace and concord, and that in any case he himself would return to the king’s side. He was then sent away to go to his lord. The king then lead his army onwards until it came to the bank of the River Rhine. 


This has a timeline:

https://books.google.com/books?id=GfvJAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA320&lpg=PA320
	938

	...Magyar invasion.
	Revolt of Eberhard and Thankmar.
	Revolt of Eberhard, Gilbert and Henry.

	939

	Revolt of Eberhard, Gilbert and Henry.
	Otto and supporters win battles at Birten, Andernach.
	Abodrites rebel.

	941

	Final revolt of Henry and east Saxons.


Widukind writes that Henry moved to Lotharingia as some sort of opening move in a plot against Otto. This was apparently a prelude to the "big coup" in 939 when Flodoard records Lotharingians switched sides to Louis.


	(16) At that time, when Eberhard was at war with the king, Hadald, who was in charge of the king’s bed-chamber, was sent to Gilbert, seeking peace and concord [with him], for up to now Gilbert had not openly espoused either party. He was received unworthily, and the response given varied from day to day. Hadald realised the duke’s enmity, and was unwilling to put up with his deceit any further. He said: ‘I am bringing a royal order to you, in the presence of the people, that you should present yourself at the royal court on the day appointed, failing which you should know for certain that you will be judged an enemy’. A messenger was similarly sent by the king to Bishop Bernhard, and poorly received, leaving with an uncertain response from him. 55 It is even said that the seals on royal letters were often broken. But after these words the duke began to treat the royal envoy a little better, and he had him led away in an honourable fashion.


interesting--Flodoard records that many were picking sides between Louis and Otto, while Widukind says people were picking sides between Henry and Otto, with Henry organizing opponents in secret


Widund says Otto sent envoys to Gislebert and Bishop Bernhard, who gave noncommittal responses.

On Bernhard:

https://books.google.com/books?id=M3ivAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA234
	Otto I's emperorship stemmed from his victories over 'barbarian' peoples, Hungarians and others, so the opening narrative of Pope John XII's privilege authorising the Saxon ruler's most cherished plans, proclaimed. He had come to receive the triumphal crown of victory, 'in inperii clumen' from St Peter, prince of the Apostles 'through us [John XII]'. ...John's privilege harnesses the emperporship to the forcible conversion of Slav peoples under Saxon military rule and envisaged the archbishopric of Magdeburg and suffragan sees as the bastions from which it was to be brought about. THe papal privilege entitled the emporer and his successors to allocate and distribute the tributes and the tithes of those baptised or yet to be baptised to the see of Magdeburg, Merseburg and others, together with the converts. But it took some years before Otto's own son, Archbishop William of Mainz, would bow to a diminution of his jurisdiction, and Bishop Bernhard of Halberstadt, for whom it meant ceding some of his parish to the new metropolis, refused to yield as long as he lived, not could Otto coerce him.23

	...23 THe resistance put up by William of Mainz and Bernard of Halberstadt (and by others less clearly visible in the sources) to the new ecclesiastical province is best summarised in D. Claude, Geschichte des Erzbistums Magdeburg bis in das 12, Jahrhundert 1


apparently Bernard was opposed to some clergy changes Otto and the pope were making

interesting Otto's son became archbishop, shows that family cared about church and maybe saw it as a way to power. Widukind says something like "this is ok shouldn't be critizied" citing scripture were some holy priests acted as secular judges before

there are signs that Otto and his allies cared a lot about getting certain people in place as bishops--rebels against Louis apparently besiged Reims just to make Artoldus archbishop there and both Otto and Louis came to a big synod about it and ignored the pope. Apparently a faction in the clergy saw the Ottonians as a way to get their people in place, through conquest or otherwise.


Widukind like Flodoard makes it sound like some shit was going down in the 939 rebellion, people picking sides and "it even said that the seals on royal letters were often broken."


https://www.leeds.ac.uk/arts/download/1965/the_deeds_of_the_saxons_by_widukind_of_korvey
	(17) Preparing their forces for war, Henry and Gilbert went down towards the Rhine to meet the king. Mindful of his oath, Agina went ahead of the army and presented himself to the king at the Rhine crossing. Greeting him humbly, he said: ‘Your brother, [who is] my lord, is glad that you are safe and sound, and wants you to reign for a long time over a great and far-flung realm. He wishes to hasten to your service just as fast as he can’. The king demanded of him whether his brother had decided on peace or war, for looking into the distance he saw a mighty host slowly marching with standards raised, and heading towards that part of his army which had now crossed the Rhine. Turning to Agina, he said: ‘What does this multitude want, and whose is it?’ The latter replied quite calmly: ‘It is my lord, your brother. If he gave any thought to be influenced by my persuasion, he has now decided otherwise. I have, however, come as I swore to do’. Hearing these words, the king did not hide how perturbed he was by any gesture, because there were no ships on which he could cross the Rhine; and there was no other way to cross this huge river; nor did time permit those stationed on the far bank to contemplate any other means of escaping this sudden attack – they had to fight for their lives or perish at the enemy’s hands. Hence, stretching out his hands in supplication to God, the king said: ‘God, author and ruler of all things, “consider your people”, 56 over whom you wished me to rule, so that, when they have been rescued from the enemy, everyone shall know that no mortal person can oppose your disposition, You who are all-powerful and live and reign in eternity. 57


says Otto met his brother's forces at the Rhine, had no way to escape the attack, and Otto called upon help from God


	Meanwhile those who were on the far bank sent their baggage and equipment to a place called Xanten. Having thus made ready, they awaited the enemy. Since a pond lay between our men and the enemy, the Saxons split their forces, one section charged the enemy from the flank, and the other followed by attacking them in the rear. Pressing their attack home into the midst of their enemies, our few men impetuously drove back their many enemies. It was indeed reported that there were just over a hundred of our armoured warriors, whereas the enemy army was much greater in number. But the enemy, attacked both from in front and from the rear – and they ought to have taken most careful precautions against the latter – were not resolute. There were some of our men who knew how to speak a little of the French language (Gallica lingua), and who shouted out in French, urging the enemy to flee. The latter thought that it was their won comrades who were crying out in this way, and so they began to run away, as they were being called on to do. 


interesting, Flodoard records:


https://books.google.com/books?id=OpsTS-E_pFgC&
	[King Louis] also recieved some Lotharingians who came to meet him. Among these were many of King Otto's fideles who were fleeing across the Rhine.


same retreat? both say Lotharingians were retreating from the Rhine


https://www.leeds.ac.uk/arts/download/1965/the_deeds_of_the_saxons_by_widukind_of_korvey
	Many of our men were wounded that day, but only a few were killed. Among these was Albrecht, known as the White, who was wounded by Duke Henry’s spear, and died a few days later. All the enemy, however, were slain, captured or put to flight. All their baggage, and all the military equipment of the enemy, was shared among the victors. From the ranks of the Lotharingians, a man called Godfrey the Black was praised for having fought well in that battle. 58 But Mancia, who was mentioned above, fell that day. 59

	(18) Dedi the Thuringian sent news to the governors of the towns in the east who belonged to Henry’s party of the king’s victory, and he told them that Henry had fallen in the battle – by this cunning action he persuaded them all to surrender themselves into the king’s power. Henry, however, never [forgot] this deed or intended to leave it unpunished. 60 Out of all these towns only two remained in his hands, Merseburg and Scheidungen. After his victory it seemed sensible to the king to pursue his brother and brother-in-law. ... 

	[A long account follows of Otto’s further campaign against Henry and the two rebel dukes]


Widukind says they won with losses, and Dedi the Thuringian started a rumor that Henry was killed and persuaded them to surrender

editor of this skips account of Otto battle against rebellion


	(26) Herman was then sent with an army to punish the presumption of the dukes. He found them near the River Rhine, without the greater part of their army, because they had already crossed the Rhine with their booty. Duke Eberhard was surrounded by armed soldiers; although he fought back bravely he was wounded many times and was eventually speared and killed. Gilbert fled and boarded a ship with many of his men, but it was so heavily burdened by their weight that it sank, and the duke, who was drowned with the others, was never found.


Flodoard records:


https://books.google.com/books?id=OpsTS-E_pFgC&
	Duke Gislebert of the Lotharingians set out raiding across the Rhine and was returning with the Saxons in pursuit. He jumped into the Rhine with his horse and was killed by the force of the water. His body was never found but it was said that fishermen discovered the corpse of a man, which was buried and concealed because of his equipment.


both saw he drowned but "ship so heavy it sank" and "ran from Saxons, jumped in water and died" pretty different. Sounds like there were some rumors put out about his death.


https://www.leeds.ac.uk/arts/download/1965/the_deeds_of_the_saxons_by_widukind_of_korvey
	On being informed of this Victoria of his knights and of the death of the dukes the king gave thanks to Almighty God, who had so often rendered help [to him] when it was needed. He appointed Otto son of Ricwin as the governor of Lotharingia, and entrusted him with raising Gilbert’s son, a promising boy called Henry, and then he returned to Saxony. The boy’s mother was joined in marriage to King Louis, and Henry, the brother of the king, retreated into the kingdom of Charles. 62 A very hard winter followed the death of the dukes, and this winter was followed by a very serious famine. ....


says they praised god, got a new governor for Lotharingia and Henry fled to France and Otto's sister married Louis

this is the only mention of King Louis so far (unless it was something in sections removed)

what's up with Flodoard saying it was a fight between Louis and Otto and Widkund saying it was between Henry and Otto?

After this, Louis starts increasingly publicly siding with Otto, which looks bad for both if Louis was supposed to be head of coup against Otto

Flodoard records that Louis and Otto had a "firm friendship" even before the coup

says after the coup Otto pillaged and burned Lotharingia

in 940, records Otto gave Lotharingia to Henry and went after Louis, got some hostages, and went home:


https://books.google.com/books?id=OpsTS-E_pFgC&
	...King Louis entered Laon and provided his men with necessary sustenances. Then, along with Hugh the Black [duke of Burgundy] and William [Towhead, count] of Poitou, he returned to Burgundy. King Otto gave [the administration of the] Lotharingian kingdom to his brother Henry [duke of Bavaria]. Then, with a multitude of diverse peoples whom he had gathered with him, Otto set out into Burgundy after King Louis. Otto had with him [King] Conrad [III of Upper Burgundy], son of King Rudolf [II] of Jura, whom he had captured by means of a ruse and whom he kept with him. Otto laid out his fortified encampment on the banks of the Seine and recieved hostages from Hugh the Black, who also swore that he would not harm Hugh [the Great] or Heribert [of Vermandois], who had committed themselves to Otto. When this was completed, Otto returned home.


later same year, Louis set out for Lotharingia, met with Otto's forces, and arranged a truce:

	
	...King Louis attacked the munitio of Pierrepont, withdrawing from it after he had recieved hostages. He then set out into the Lotharingian kingdom with Archbishop Artoldus [of Reims] and with others of his jideles. King Otto crossed the Rhine and came out against him. However, a truce was arranged between them by their jideles.


in 942, records that Louis, William Longsword and William of Poitou met Lotharingians at Oise and Louis sent hostages to Otto


	...William received King Louis in a royal manner at Rouen. Likewise, [Count] William of Poitou and the Bretens, with their pindpes, came to the king. With these men the king came to the river Oise, while Hugh [the Great] and Heribert [of Vermandois] encambed with Otho [of Verdun], duke of the Lotharingians. After the bridges were destroyed and ships had been seized, along with the ships that they were able to take from the other side of the river, dissension was stirred up among them by the negotiators on each side and a truce was arranged to last from the middle of September until the middle of November. Hostages were exchanged, including Heribert's younger son, who was given to the king. The king [Louis] himself, along with William [Longsword] and Hugh [the Great], sent hostages to King Otto [of Germany] through Duke Otho.


next entry, says there was a famine, and Louis met with Otto and "strengthened their frindship", then Otto made peace between Louis and Hugh the White and Heribert, and Louis restored bishop Raoul II:


	...There was a great famine through all Francia and Burgundy, along with an epidemic that struck cattle, and few animals of this type survived in these lands.

	King Louis set out to meet King Otto and the two men received each other amicably and strengthened their friendship with a pact. Otto labored intensely to make peace between King Louis and Hugh [the Great], so that Hugh at least returned [his allegiance] to the king. Likewise, even Heribert [of Vermandois] and his son, also named Heribert, became [the men] of King Louis. When the king returned, the bishops of the province of Reims came to him, and Louis received [Bishop] Raoul [II] of Laon and restored his see to him.


in 943, records some of Louis's fideles were caught plotting against Otto, which led to ill will between them:


	...King Otto [of Germany] captured some of King Louis's fideles who had plotted against Otto, which led to ill will between the two kings.


in 944, records that Louis's envoys were received well by Otto, but one of Hugh the White's envoys publicly read complaints by Louis to Otto and "added many additional insults to Louis", which angered Otto who ejected Louis's envoys and snubbed Louis:


	...	Duke Hugh sought to meet with Herman [duke of Swabia], who had been sent to lay seige to the castella of King Louis's jideles, Ragenarius and his brother Raoul. They did not have a fortified position (praesidium) from which they might resist Herman, and when many gifts had been given, they asked King Otto for his pardon. Otto went to the palace at Aachen and met with the Lotharingians, and the envoys of King Louis as well as the elgates from DUke Hugh appeared there as well. Otto received Louis's legates but he was hostile to the duke's legates. However, Manasses, one of Hugh's envoys, saw that Louis's men were very opposed to his own legation's mission, in the middle of the meeting made public certian mandates recently given to him by Louis to be given to Otto, which previously he did not wish to reveal. He thus disclosed harsh rebukes that King Louis had ordered him to convey to King Otto because Otto had failed to live up the oaths that he had sworn to Louis, and Manasses added many additional insults to Louis as well. Otto's anger was thus aroused and, when Louis's envoys were unable to contradict with Manasses had said, he ejected them from his court and treated Hugh's representatives honorably and ordered his own fideles to desist from giving aid to Louis or from having contact with him.


in 946, records that Louis' wife/Otto's sister Queen Gerberga called Otto for help, who gathered a very large army and came to Francia. He met Louis amicably, then they all went to Loan, but decided taking it was too hard and besieged Reims instead. Bishop Hugh took advice to surrender, and Otto and Louis entered and installed Artoldus. They left Gerberga at Reims and went on to attack Hugh the White:


	...Queen Gerberga recently sent a legation to King Otto, her brother, demanding help from him. Otto gathered a very large army from all of his kingdoms and, along with Conrad [the Peaceful], the king of Cisalpine Gaul [Upper Burgundy], came into Francia. King Louis went out to meet them and was received by them in a friendly and honorable manner. Then they all went to Laon but, after considering the strenght of the castrum, they went away from it and attacked the urbs of Reims. They surrounded Reims with a siege, enclosing it with a large army. However, [Arch]bishop Hugh saw that he could not break the siege or resist such an immense army and took counsel with some principes who seemed to be his friends, namely Arnulf [count of Flanders], who had married his sister, Udo [count of Wetterau], whose wife was his aunt, and Herman, Udo's brother, askign them what he should do. They advised him to go out with his men and surrender the urbs because the kings had decied to expel him completely, and if the urbs should be taken by storm, they would not be able to intercede with the kings to prevent his eyes from being torn out. This advice was received and shared with others, and, on the third day of the siege, [Arch]bishop Hugh left the city with almost all of the soldiers who had been with him. Thus the kings [Louis and Otto] entered the urbs with the bishops and the prindpes and they had Lord [Arch]bishop Artoldus, who had been ejected a little earlier, reinstalled. Archbishop Robert of Trier and [Arcbhishop] Rederick of Mainz recieved him and, with each of them taking one of his hands, they restored to him the same episcopal throne. Then the kings left Queen Gerberga at Reims and, with their armies, attacked the lands of Hugh [the Great], besieging the urbs of Sen-lis. However, the saw that it was very secure and, not wishing to take it by storm with the slaughter of their own men, they withdrew. The kings then crossed the Seine and pillaged heavily everywhere except for the ciftates. They then crossed the land of the Northmen, devastating man places before returning to their own lands.


in 947, records that Otto celebrated easter with Louis and gave him gifts, then celebrated again in August. Otto mediated a truce between Hugh the White and Louis until a synod for the fight between Bishop Hugh and Artoldus was held:

	
	...King Louis celebrated Easter [11 April] at Aachen with King Otto, who honored Louis with royal gifts.

	...	At the beginning of August, the kings Louis and Otto celebrated at the convening of a placitum on the river Chiers. The princeps Hugh [the Great] established his fortified encampemtn (castra) around Mouzon and Douzy. At the court, the bishops heard the dispute between Artoldus and Hugh, the [arch]bishops of the church of Reims. However, because a synod had not been called, the quarrel could not be resolved. A synod was arranged for the middle of November. In the meantime, the see of Reims was conceded to Artoldus, and Hugh the other bishop, was permitted to stay at Mouzon. King Otto mediated a truce or armistace of the war between King Louis and the princeps Hugh [the Great], to last until the meeting of the synod.


At the synod, Otto and Louis entered together and Louis gave a speech trashing Hugh the White with the approval of King Otto. Louis said if anyone would reproach him for what he had done he would "purge himself" or fight them, according to the command of King Otto:


	...The glorious kings Otto and Louis entered and took their seats. After the speech of the apostolic legate Marinus, King Louis rose from his side and, with the approval of King Otto, he recited his dispute in the presence of Marinus and the rest of the bishops gathered there. He recounted how he had been summoned from the regions across the sea by legates of [Duke] Hugh and the rest of the principes of Francia to receive the kingdom that was his inheritence from his father. By the oaths of all and by the acclamations of the magnates (proceres) and the soldiery (militia) of the Franks he had been rasied and consecrated to possess the height of royal government. Aftewards, he had been driven out by [Duke] Hugh and he had been attacked by tricks and had been held in custody for an entire year by Hugh. He had been able to obtain his freedom only by giving up the castrum of Laon, which Queen Gerberga had held, along with her fideles gathered from all her royal residences, when Hugh was siezing the fortification. With all these evils that he had suffered after he had received the kingdom, if anyone should reproach him for what he had done, he would purge himself or defend himself in individual combat, according to the judgment of the synod and the command of King Otto.


meanwhile, Louis asked Otto for help against Hugh the White and other enemies, which Otto granted and sent Duke Conrad:

	
	...Meanwhile, King Lousi sought from King Otto assistance against [Duke] Hugh [the Great] and his otther enemies. Otto granted Louis's request and ordered Duke Conrad [the Red, of Lotharingia] to advance with the army of the Lotharingians in aid of King Louis.


in 948, records that Louis enemy Hugh the White was excommunicated because King Otto wished it to happen:


	...On the third day, especially due to the insitence of Liudulfus, King Otto's legate and chaplain, and also because King Otto wished it to happen, Count Hugh [the Great], the enemy of King Louis, was excommunicated because of the evils that he perpetrated, as already mentioned.


in 949, records that Queen Gerberga set out for Otto and celebrated Easter with him and legations of countries across Europe. She returned with a promise of Otto's help. Louis then attacked Laon and asked Conrad for help. Hugh's forces arrived and Conrad negotiated a temporary truce. Louis went to meet Otto, then one of Heribert's sons joined Louis. 



	Because the solemn day of Easter [22 April] was imminent, Queen Gerberga set out to her brother, King Otto. She celebrated Easter with him at the palace at Aachen, where legations of different peoples, that is, of the Greeks, Italians, English and others, were present.

	The queen returned to Reims with her brother's promise of assistance, and King Louis suddenly attacked Laon. During the night Louis's men secretly scaled a wall. When the bars of the gates had been broken, the king entered the oppidum and captured the guards (custodes), except for those who had climbed up the tower of the royal residence that he himself had built at the gate of th ecastrum. Louis was unable to take the stronghold and cut it off from the civitas by throwing up a wall from the inside. When Count Hugh [the Great] learned of these events, he set off to Laon with his men, while King Louis sent a legation to ask Duke Conrad of the Lotharingians to help him. Hugh [the Great] drew near the tower and established his camp in front of the gate. After installing garrison troops in the citadel with sufficient supplies, he withdrew from the hill. Therefore King Louis met with [Duke] Conrad, who spoke with Louis and arranged a truce of war between the king and Hugh [the Great] to last until the month of August. Meanwhile, Louis set out to speak with King Otto [of Germany]. After this was done, Louis returned to Reims. There Adalbertus, the son of [the late Count] Heribert [of Vermandois], came to Louis and became his man.


in 950, records that Louis sent for Otto for advice to make peace with Hugh the White. They made peace, Hugh and Louis met and the episcopate of Noyon was given to Raoul, and Hugh attacked Count Arnulf:


	...In the year 950, King Louis set out across the Meuse to seek advice and assistance from King Otto [of Germany] so that peace might be made between himself and Hugh [the Great]. Otto promised to send Duke Conrad [the Red] with the Lotharingians to Louis in order to accomplish this. Duke Conrad came with bishops and counts and conferred with Hugh [the Great] about making peace. He informed King Louis that he found Hugh agreeable and returned to King Otto after sending certain of the counts to make the king's will known to Hugh. THus King Louis and the princeps Hugh [the Great] brought their forces to the Marne to make peace. Each one was on a different side of the river and representatives were sent back and forth, with Duke Conrad, Hugh the Black [duke of Burgundy], and the bishops Adelbero [of Metz] and Fulbert [of Cambrai] serving as mediators. Hugh [the Great] came to the king and made himself the king's man and was reconciled with Count Arnulf [of Flanders], Rageholdus [count of Roucy], and Archbishop Artoldus [of Reims]. THereupon Hugh [the Great] returned the tower of Laon to the king.

	After these things had been accomplished, Hugh [the Great] had another meeting with the king at Compiegne, whereupon the epicospate of noyon was given to Raoul, an archdeacon of the same church, whom the people of noyon had chosen to be thier bishop.

	Not long aftewards Hugh the Great took his army to the urbs of Amiens and he was received into the tower that Bishop Ragembaldus [of Amiens] was holding. Hugh then besieged another tower, which was held by th emen of Count Arnulf [of Flanders]. King Louis lay ill at Laon. 


in 951, records that Bishop Adelbert's brother was plundering about the place, Louis was annoyed and sent a delegation to Otto, who replied that Otto didn't want Frederick to hold a castle without Louis' consent:


	...Meanwhile, Frderick, the brother ofBishop Adalbero [of Metz], who was betrothed to the daughter of the princeps Hugh [the Great], entered this kingdom [of Francia] and, without consulting either the king or the queen, began constructing a munitio at Fains. He frequentyl plundered about that place, which led King Louis, who was greatly annoyed, to send his delegation to King Otto [of Germany]. 

	...King Louis's legates returned from King Otto and reported that Otto did not want Frederick or any other of his men to hold any castrum in this kingdom [of Francia], and in fact he forbade it unless King Louis should give his consent.


sounds like Otto basically made Louis his vassal

got him fighting Hugh the White (who kidnapped him) instead of him, plots by Louis' fideles and Hugh the White's envoy trick said to make Otto angry at Louis and Louis showed he didn't want Otto angry--sent hostages when he met Lotharingians at Oise and figured Otto was the one to call when Adalbert's brother starting plundering about the place (would have been true that Henry would be the one to call while Gislebert was plundering). Louis deferred to Otto at the synod of Bishop Hugh vs Artoldus and seemed to care more about getting Otto's help against Hugh the White than doing anything to oppose Otto.

What did Otto get out of it? Louis did end up fighting Hugh the White while Otto was busy elsewhere, and Louis also helped him install Artoldus at Reims and keep him there and keep bishop Raoul in power. I think a few times Louis fell ill as well leaving Otto's sister in power.

It's weird that Louis married Gerberga after the coup fell apart--Widukind say Gislebert marrying her was part of Henry the Fowler's winning him to his side, and that his "joined him both by friendship and by affinity to" Henry.