

groves brought on Oppenheimer and William Laurance, and did other wierd things


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leslie_Groves
	...He attempted to secure an appointment to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point in 1914, earning a nomination from President Wilson, which allowed him to compete for a vacancy, but did not score a sufficiently high enough mark on the examination. Charles W. Bell from California's 9th congressional district accepted Groves as an alternate for one of his appointments, but the principal nominee accepted. Instead, Groves enrolled at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), near Boston. In 1916, Groves took the examinations for admission to West Point again and this time he was accepted.

	... During the New England Flood of November 1927 he was sent to Fort Ethan Allen, Vermont, to assist with a detachment of the 1st Engineers. After a pontoon bridge they constructed was swamped and swept away by the flood waters, Groves was accused of negligence. A month later Groves and several of his men were seriously injured, one fatally, when a block of TNT prematurely detonated. Groves' superior wrote a critical report on him, but the Chief of Engineers, Major General Edgar Jadwin, interceded, attributing blame to Groves' superiors instead. Groves was returned to Fort DuPont

	...Newspapers began publishing accounts charging the Construction Division with incompetence, ineptitude, and inefficiency.[15] Groves, who "had a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty",[1] was one of a number of engineer officers brought in to turn the project around. He was tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress.

	...The Army Chief of Staff, General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower, met with Groves on 30 January 1948 to evaluate his performance. Eisenhower recounted a long list of complaints about Groves pertaining to his rudeness, arrogance, insensitivity, contempt for the rules and maneuvering for promotion out of turn. 


anything going on here?