


seems like good legal history:


https://www.clearinghouse.net/results.php?searchSpecialCollection=44
	President Trump has issued a series of Executive Orders relating to immigration and refugee policy. The first order on refugees, available here, totally barred admission into the United States of all nationals of Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen--including those who are already legal green card holders and already here. Legal challenges ensued immediately. The original Executive Order was placed on hold when in States of Washington and Minnesota v. Trump the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Washington granted a temporary injunction against its operation, and on Feb. 9, the 9th Circuit refused to stay that injunction. 




darweesh case stopped them from sending people back who were in air while EO signed


Washington v. Trump case placed OE on hold with temporary injunction, stay refused Feb 9.




------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0029-0002.pdf


this is motion for TRO by Washington State on Jan 30

it is written badly

no counter-argument by gov yet, this is just argument that Wash state likely to prevail



------


http://www.cnn.com/2017/02/03/politics/federal-judge-temporarily-halts-trump-travel-ban-nationwide-ag-says/index.html
	Federal Judge James Robart, a George W. Bush appointee who presides in Seattle, halted the enforcement of Trump's order Friday night, effective nationwide. 


Travel ban stopped Feb 3 by Washington case


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0029-0019.pdf

This is " Reply in Support of Emergency Motion for Stay Pending Appeal [Ct. of App. ECF# 70] " date Feb 3


argument against an injuction by Washington state. Saying they wanted an emergency stay against the injunction


try to argue doesn't apply to LPRs


says the countries were identified by Congress, Obama admin as havens for terror


pg 8

interesting, says the ban applies to *all* refugees, and so the section on favoring persecuted religious minorities is not some scheme to favor one religion.

Maybe argument still doesn't work, as Syrian war means large percentage (overwhelming majority?) of refugees are Syrian and Trump went on TV saying to prioritize Syrian Christians


pg 10

arguing aliens have no due process rights (but they do...)

I guess DOJ lying


pg 11

	...The potential national-security risks and harms resulting from the compelled application of procedures that the President has determined must be reexamined, for the purpose of ensuring an adequate measure of protection for the Nation, cannot be undone.  


so this is why it's an emergency? I don't get it.


	...The State has made clear that it is seeking to protect LPRs and other nationals from th e seven identified countries who were  previously admitted to the United States a nd are either temporarily abroad or are  here now and wish to travel outside this country— not aliens who are attempting to enter the country for the first time.  See Response 11-12, 15-16; Transcript 7-8, 15- 16. That makes sense because the latter class of aliens have no constitutional rights with respect to entry into the country—a  point the State largely conceded below.   See Transcript 7, 15.  The  injunction, however, bars  all  applications of Section  3(c)—even as to aliens who have never prev iously visited this country, and have not yet begun the process of obtaining a visa.


This is a good point--maybe legal to cancel visas of a bunch of random people coming from a foreign country if they've never been here before, but awful to strand a lawful resident of U.S. If the case were just about helping those stranded people get back and not having a muslim ban, it would be airtight, but this case added a bunch of shit that makes it a politicized fight that undermines their own argument (epecially once e.g. Fox News covers it). Figures that state of Washington would do this. Also interesting that they were the first (iirc) to sue, and early on--probably help to put pressure on Yates to make her decision before she could show McGahn the evidence.


should look at court cases of people stranded, those are better


------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_challenges_to_the_Trump_travel_ban#Aziz_v._Trump

Aziz vs Trump was civil action filed Jan 28


ACLU got involed in Darweesh v. Trump


Louhghalam v. Trump

guy detained without due process, singled out for religion, got to court Jan 29 and led to TRO, although ACLU involved


Mohammed v. United States

U.S. citizens involved in suit


a bunch of habeus corpus suits were voluntarily dismissed because they got released



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_13769#Legal_challenges
	Legal challenges to the order were brought almost immediately after its issuance. From January 28 to January 31 almost 50 cases were filed in federal courts. The courts, in turn, granted temporary relief, including a nationwide temporary restraining order (TRO) that bars the enforcement of major parts of the executive order. The TRO specifically blocks the executive branch from enforcing provisions of the executive order that (1) suspend entry into the U.S. for people from seven countries for 90 days and (2) place limitations on the acceptance of refugees, including "any action that prioritizes the refugee claims of certain religious minorities."[238] The TRO also allows "people from the seven countries who had been authorized to travel, along with vetted refugees from all nations, to enter the country." The Trump administration is appealing the TRO.


almost 50 cases filed Jan 28 - 31. Wikipedia lists 4...

but DOJ would have a lot of work to do right away.


------

Seattle times

AG Bob Ferguson files lawsuit -- first by any state -- to invalidate Trump's order

January 30, 2017 7:09 AM


early morning of the 30th, AG Ferguson gives a press conference (I think) and files lawsuit to invalidate the EO.


the Wahsington sate case, I think first to challenge constitutionality on 1st ammendment, was filed early morning of the 30th



------


http://www.minnesotalawreview.org/2017/03/comparing-and-contrasting-legal-challenges-trump-travel-ban/#post-2310-footnote-21

on some of the court cases

state of Washington complaint first filed Jan 30

	...Although the circumstances of his ordeal are typical of many affected by the Executive Order, Darweesh’s story might be the most well-known because it prompted the stay granted by U.S. District Judge Ann Donnelly.


Darweesh case important because it led to stay


------


darweesh case


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/politics/2-iraqis-file-lawsuit-after-being-detained-in-ny-due-to-travel-ban
	The class-action lawsuit in New York is the first legal challenge to Trump's controversial executive order, which indefinitely suspends admissions for Syrian refugees and limits the flow of other refugees into the United States by instituting what the President has called "extreme vetting" of immigrants. 




Yale Law School

law.yale.edu

Darweesh et al. v. Trump et al

has docs on the case

I think this case led to first stay against the ban?

doc "Transcript from January 28, 2017 Hearing on Emergency Motion for Stay" is important. Shows DOJ lawyers struggling to argue for the ban.


pg 4

Riley says the case is moot because original petitioners released, but it's a class lawsuit




https://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Ayale.law.edu+Darweesh+et+al.+v.+Trump+et+al&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&client=firefox-b-1-ab



DOJ attorney's not doing well:


https://law.yale.edu/system/files/area/clinic/document/2017.01.28_emergency_motion_for_stay.pdf
	HAMEED KHALID DARWEESH, et al., Plaintiffs, - versus - DONALD TRUMP, et al., Defendants

	January 28, 2017

	TRANSCRIPT OF CIVIL CAUSE FOR EMERGENCY MOTIONFOR STAY OF REMOVAL BEFORE THE HONORABLE ANN M. DONNELLYUNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


	APPEARANCES:

	...For the Defendants:

	Robert L. Capers, Esq.
	United States Attorney

	Susan Riley, Esq.
	Elliot M. Schachner, Esq.
	Scott Dunn, Esq.
	Assistant U.S. Attorney

	Gisela Westwater, Esq.
	U.S. Department of Justice


	...THE COURT: All right.  So, while the two-named -- well, my second question is, is there any assurance that there won't be some effort to remove the people that are already here?  Is there any assurance by that on the part of the government?

	MS. RILEY: Do you mean the two-named plaintiffs?

	THE COURT: Yes.

	MS. RILEY: I have no information in that regard.

	THE COURT: Okay.

	MS. RILEY: And part of the government's position, and I'm going to let Ms. Westwater take the lead in arguing this, is that this has unfolded with such speed, both the executive order and the actions taken pursuant to the executive order, that we haven't had an opportunity to address any of the issues, the important legal issues, the status of anyone who may be at the airport.

	THE COURT:  Well, that's why I really started by asking if you really oppose the stay because if you haven't had a chance to address it -- I mean, if I don't grant the stay, there are while not perhaps not these two-named plaintiffs, there are, it sounds to me, like a host of people who will be affected by this executive order and I think just based on what the petitioners have alleged today, is not something that's just -- that is something that is very real. And I do recognize that you haven't really had a chance to review all of this but that's, I think, why they're asking for the stay.


judge goes over "four tests" for granting stay, brings up irreparable harm

pg 9

struggles to argue that the plaintiffs won't suffer irreperable injury, goes to saying its a broad request and I guess argues it should be case-by-case


pg 10-11 plaintiff argues they would be sent back to dangerous country, took off before EO signed and landed after


	MS. WESTWATER: Yes, your Honor. It appears the question seems to be what is irreparable harm...

	THE COURT: ...Apparently, there is somebody who they're putting on a plane -- what do you think about that -- back to Syria? Irreparable harm?

	MS. WESTWATER: Your Honor, the government does not have sufficient information about this person or the circumstances, your Honor, to be able to have a position. And I'm sorry, as your Honor had suggested, we all do require additional time to have more facts.

	THE COURT: Well, that's exactly why that I am going to grant the stay. So, the stay is --

	UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: (Inaudible).

	THE COURT: No, no, no, no, not a word. Not a word.

	The stay is granted.




interesting, goes on to bring back next Friday, Riley says "too soon" (pg 14)


then the plaintiff argues to make time shorter! Says they would be detained for two weeks if they wait that long. So there's one way the DOJ was under a lot of pressure... lawyer argues to release them under supervision.


in the end, schedule government reply for Feb 21st


if they can do that, seems like gov could have waited a longer time to make a decision...



------

Aziz v. Trump was TROs detained at Dulles


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0002.pdf

petition

no hearing? I guess don't need for TRO

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0001.pdf

granted same day

says: need to let lawyers access LPRs

cannot send LPRs back for a week



------

this case also had gov show over weekend at hearing:

https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15591


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MA-0007-0004.pdf


pg 4

talking about prior cases in NY and Virginia

this one in Boston

plaintiffs national restraining order (form NY) and restraining order from Virginia do not completely solve problem for clients

one client is LPR stuck in Iran, another was about to leave country

say order not explicit on LPRs, and only protects against removal (so this is Darweesh case referred to)

pg 7

Fed says case moot since they were released (but that's not what they're asking for...)

says he has a hard time getting information


	JUDGE BURROUGHS: What's your view on all of this? Your official view.

	MR. FARQUHAR: ...it's extremely complicated... It's my understanding from my brother and sisters at opposing counsel table that there are individuals that are being told that you can not board a plane going to the United States, because you're not going to be let in to the United States. I can't confirm that information at this point. I have not been able to contact the appropriate parties within the Custom and Border Patrol to confirm that this is, in fact, taking place...

	JUDGE BURROUGHS: So It's your view that this petition is moot, and we should wait until tomorrow when other people are detained or other people are denied the ability to get on a plane?

	MR. FARQUHAR: Your Honor, at this point I think what needs to take place is some type of a concerted effort by the United States to address the situation.

	...I'm attempting -- or at least I was attempting until my phone died -- to reach some folks out of MAIN Justice to ascertain how we may be able to coordinate this through Washington, DC.

	Right now, again, I'm unaware of specifically any petitioners or any plaintiffs that could be filing suit based on the fact that they attempted to board a plane overseas, and they were told they have to go home.

	It is my understanding that -- from, again, my brother and my sisters at opposing counsel table -- that this has happened.

	But I'm not in a position right now to address that.

	MS. CHURCH: ...Your Honor, we do know of at least one junior at MIT who's been in contact with us who attempted to board a plane, I believe in London -- I've talked to a lot of people today, so I'm  not totally positive about the location -- who was denied.

	...A representative of the Attorney General's Office has told us that there are families currently in Egypt who all are lawful permanent residents who are all -- local Boston residents who were all sent back and not allowed to board a plane.

	...We don't know the exact details, but we've been told that the airlines are not allowing it based on the executive order.

	And those are my two examples. I'm tracking through national immigration lawyers thousands of examples. I mean, it's happening all over the world.

	...JUDGE BURROUGHS: Mr. Farquhar, I take your point about there being some advantages to this being dealt with on a more national basis but your phone died. If you had a phone, would some additional time tonight make a difference, or are you going to stand on the mootness argument? What's your 'druthers for tonight?

	MR. FARQUHAR: Well, Your Honor, as we speak, my phone is being charged, so that's the good news.

	...At this point, Your Honor, unfortunately given the fact that is is the weekend, it has been a little more difficult to get in touch with folks in DC that are high enough to, in fact, execute some type of an order for the rest of the country to react. And so we're moving as quickly as we can, but right now I can't state what the United States is going to do.

	...MAG. JUDGE DEIN: So are you doing constitutional issues as well as statutory violations? What's the base -- on the merits.

	MS. CHURCH: Yes, Your Honor. In our complaint there are multiple constitutional grounds cited. One ground that is important is that this executive order is premised upon and animus against the people of a Muslim religion. It targets people only from countries that are predominantly Muslim. People are -- and that's cited as ground 1 in our petition.

	Ground 2 is due process grounds, that these individuals are being held, detained, interrogated and excluded without procedural due process.


	...JUDGE BURROUGHS: Mr. Farquhar?

	MR. FARQUHAR: Thank you Your Honor. Your Honor, as I told me brothers and sisters this evening, I understand where they're coming from. I'm trying to think of some type of solution within the authority that I currently have.

	...Perhaps an order from this Court instructing the Custom and Border Patrol that no individual can, in fact, be deported or returned to where they came from without first contacting the U.S. Attorney's Office, which would give us an opportunity at least to address the matter and bring it before this Court.

	...In the interim, the United States certainly, Your Honor, between today and tomorrow, I'm sure we're going to have many conversations with DC to try to figure out a national approach to try to solve this problem for now.


	...MAG. JUDGE DEIN: Well, then good. I do have a question, though. And I know you're on the spot, Mr. Farquhar, but there's sort of an assumption that the complaint is valid -- that the arguments raised in the complaint are correct, as a matter of law.

	Is there anything that you want to address on the merits that this executive order is illegal?

	MR. FARQUHAR: Your Honor, I am not prepared at this point. I first got wind of this at about ten o'clock at an engagement party. That glass of wine quickly went sour, because I had to put that away. So I am not, unfortunately, as up to speed as my brothers and sisters are here. I wish I was, but I'm just not.

	There are people in the United States Government right now that are sifting through this and trying to make heads or tails of what's going on


gov lawyers showed up drunk, no phone, no idea what's going on

	...All we know is that we have an executive order...

	...(Court recessed from 12:12:41 a.m. to 1:48:11 a.m.)...


they draft an order based of Plaintiffs, gov lawyer has no objections


issued order at 2:00 AM, wanted to schedule a hearing some time within next seven days.


can see why DOJ would not want to defend this.

Yates face internal pressure?



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_challenges_to_the_Trump_travel_ban#Aziz_v._Trump
	Legal challenges to these orders were brought almost immediately after their issuance. From January 28 to 31 almost 50 cases were filed in federal courts.[5] 


(source for that: https://www.clearinghouse.net/results.php?searchSpecialCollection=44)

------

Boston case most important

this is the one that basically ended EO for Boston

one plaintiff was LPR stranded, argued there were others, and so to relieve had to basically allow flights from Boston (at least for LPRs but they did everyone)

and by Trump's argument, ended national security protections from EO. Media says flights were being directed through Boston after their TRO, and so any "bad dudes" could just come in through Boston. So as far as Trump says purpose is, EO is now over early morning 29th.


pg 23:

argues harm happening "capable of repitition," says more to be in same boat "as soon as the morning."

CBP disobeying this court order next day not helping if they expect to win...


wait, what is "national order" they are talking about...







------

not telling CBP/other officials, DOJ, giving no warning all tied together to set up Trump to lose.

CBP was confused about order, LPRs are getting detained, people stranded, some staff reportedly quizzing travellers and detaining based on religion, denying them seeing a lawyer (easier to get away with in confusion). Meanwhile, DOJ just heard about this and had no idea what was going on, lawyers leaving wine at the bar to go to court showing up drunk, don't know arguments or even know facts. ACLU lawyers, who all went to airports and started walking around talking to people, asking them to text family members and such, basically doing intel work, seem most informed. They easily win in the motions for injunctions and such against the order.


so three important cases over weekend:

Darweesh V. Trump in NY, first did nationwide stay saying couldn't detain people (I think?) and couldn't send people back with valid visas. This on 28th.

Aziz Vs. Trump in Virginia, put a TRO on the ban. Forbid sending back LPRs for 7 days This on 28th

Loughalam v. Trump in Boston, put a TRO on the ban expiring Feb 5th. Could not detain or remove basically anyone affected by EO coming into Boston, and orderd CBO to notify airlines to stop detaining people flying into Boston. Had some constitutional arguments. iirc only applied to Logan. This on early morning of 29th.


also remember reports saying to just redirect people through Boston after ruling.

So EO basically over at this point. DOJ look like idiots, probably unhappy at this point, legal battle is stacked against them.

Yates meets with lawyers that Monday. Lawyers tired, humiliated. The state of Washington had just filed a complaint saying the whole EO is unconstitutional. Someone tells Yates she has to make a judgement on the order's constitutionality by Monday...


------

would this be a new case? anything like this before (deny travel to LPRs)


https://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/administrative/immigration/ialj_am17_immigration_prgm.authcheckdam.pdf


says "new frontier"


here's something:


http://www.scotusblog.com/2012/01/argument-preview-the-rights-of-lawful-permanent-residents-returning-to-the-u-s/
	The Supreme Court soon will again turn its gaze to a complex immigration case involving a long-term lawful permanent resident of the United States facing deportation.  Just last December, the Court in Judulang v. Holder rejected as arbitrary and capricious the ruling of the Board of Immigration Appeals that a lawful permanent resident convicted of a crime was not eligible for relief from deportation.  On January 18, in Vartelas v. Holder the Court will hear oral arguments in a removal case that raises an issue that has confounded the courts, namely, how the immigration laws and the U.S. Constitution apply to lawful permanent residents (i.e., legal immigrants) who leave the United States and then return.


different for denying entry vs. being removed


	...The courts, including the Supreme Court, when addressing the case of a noncitizen who fails to fit neatly into the established legal categories, such as when a lawful permanent resident who has lived in the United States for many years — and thus has significant community ties – travels outside the country and seeks to return.  Given the ties that these lawful permanent residents generally have to the community, courts frequently have been reluctant to impose on them the stricter rules applicable to initial entrants.



a corner case


	...In Rosenberg v. Fleuti (1963) a lawful permanent resident from Switzerland visited Mexico for a few hours and, upon his return, was charged with being excludable because he had committed a “crime involving moral turpitude” before he left the country; the U.S. government later claimed that he was also excludable because he was homosexual.  To avoid a harsh result, as well as to avoid deciding difficult constitutional questions, the Supreme Court interpreted the immigration statute to mean that Fleuti’s “innocent, casual, and brief” departure from the United States was not “meaningfully interruptive” of his lawful permanent residence and thus he was not seeking “entry” (and thus admission) into the country.  Under the Court’s reasoning, Fleuti therefore could not be denied admission on the exclusion grounds applicable to initial entrants.

	...In 1996, Congress added Section 101(a)(13)(C)(v) to the INA.  That statute provides that a lawful permanent resident who returns from a trip out of the United States “shall not be regarded as seeking an admission” unless he “has committed an offense identified in” Section 212(a)(2) of the INA, which includes crimes involving moral turpitude.  The change in the law helped lawful permanent residents without criminal convictions who traveled abroad because it did not treat them as seeking admission (and thus like initial entrants subject to the inadmissibility grounds).  The amendment was no help to Vartelas, however.  Because counterfeiting is a crime of moral turpitude, a ground for inadmissibility, Vartelas was inadmissible under Section 101(a)(13)(C)(v) of the INA.


so if not a criminal, can leave for a bit and come back and procedures for seeking entry do not apply (what procedures/rights do apply?)


someone who commited a crime before this new law tried to challenge in court, arguing retroactive


ok this is already in 9th circtui's writeup

https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2017/02/09/17-35105.pdf
	The procedural protections provided by the Fifth Amendment’s Due Process Clause are not limited to citizens. Rather, they “appl[y] to all ‘persons’ within the United States, including aliens,” regardless of “whether their presence here is lawful, unlawful, temporary, or permanent.” Zadvydas v. Davis, 533 U.S. 678, 693 (2001). These rights also apply to certain aliens attempting to reenter the United States after travelling abroad. Landon v. Plasencia, 459 U.S. 21, 33-34 (1982). The Government has provided no affirmative argument showing that the States’ procedural due process claims fail as to these categories of aliens. For example, the Government has failed to establish that lawful permanent residents have no due process rights when seeking to re-enter the United States. See id.(“[T]he returning resident alien is entitled as a matter of due process to a hearing on the charges underlying any attempt to exclude him.” (quoting Rosenberg v. Fleuti, 374 U.S. 449, 460 (1963))). Nor has the Government established that the Executive Order provides lawful permanent residents with constitutionally sufficient process to challenge their denial of re-entry. Seeid.at 35 (“[T]he courts must evaluate the particular circumstances and determine what procedures would satisfy the minimum requirements of due process on the re-entry of a permanent resident alien.”).


DOJ on this:

https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/eoir/legacy/2013/05/01/vol7no4.pdf


-----


right to travel a "liberty" that can't be restricted without due process:


https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/357/116
	...The right to travel is a part of the "liberty" of which the citizen cannot be deprived without due process of law under the Fifth Amendment. So much is conceded by the Solicitor General. In Anglo-Saxon law, that right was emerging at least as early as the Magna Carta.

	Three Human Rights in the Constitution of 1787 (1956), 171-181, 187 et seq., shows how deeply engrained in our history this freedom of movement is. Freedom of movement across frontiers in either direction, and inside frontiers as well, was a part of our heritage. Travel abroad, like travel within the country, may be necessary for a livelihood. It may be as close to the heart of the individual as the choice of what he eats, or wears, or reads. Freedom of movement is basic in our scheme of values. See Crandall v. Nevada, 6 Wall. 35, 44; Williams v. Fears, 179 U.S. 270, 274; Edwards v. California, 314 U.S. 160. "Our nation," wrote Chafee, has thrived on the principle that, outside areas of plainly harmful conduct, every American is left to shape his own life as he thinks best, do what he pleases, go where he pleases.


https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/due_process
	The Constitution states only one command twice. The Fifth Amendment says to the federal government that no one shall be "deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law." The Fourteenth Amendment, ratified in 1868, uses the same eleven words, called the Due Process Clause, to describe a legal obligation of all states. These words have as their central promise an assurance that all levels of American government must operate within the law ("legality") and provide fair procedures. Most of this essay concerns that promise.

	...The clause also promises that before depriving a citizen of life, liberty or property, government must follow fair procedures. Thus, it is not always enough for the government just to act in accordance with whatever law there may happen to be. Citizens may also be entitled to have the government observe or offer fair procedures, whether or not those procedures have been provided for in the law on the basis of which it is acting. Action denying the process that is “due” would be unconstitutional. Suppose, for example, state law gives students a right to a public education, but doesn't say anything about discipline. Before the state could take that right away from a student, by expelling her for misbehavior, it would have to provide fair procedures, i.e. “due process.”


so what does due process look like for denying someone travel?


9th circuit said no-fly list unconstitutional, needs better due process procedures:

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2014/06/25/judge-rules-no-fly-list-unconstitutional/?utm_term=.690cee460c49



http://nationalsecuritylawbrief.com/2016/04/18/constitutionality-of-the-no-fly-list
	The flagship case was Latif v. Holder, where the ACLU brought suit on behalf of thirteen U.S. citizens and permanent residents who were barred from flying. The Judge from the District of Oregon stated that being placed on the No Fly List “implicated liberty interests protected by the Due Process Clause.”[1] When the decision was appealed, the District Court of Oregon ruled that the existing procedures to contest being on the No Fly List were ineffective and the government was ordered to create constitutionally proper procedures.


so for similar case, 9th circuit made order on constitutional proper procedures


	...Substantive Due Process limits what the government can do even if the government is providing the proper procedure. However, in this case, the process put into place is anything but the appropriate process. In this case, there is an argument to be made that this process that has been put into place may violate a U.S. citizen or person’s right to travel and movement and does not allow for a way to satisfactorily adjudicate the issue for correction. The right to travel encompasses at least three different components, but in this case, the right to travel means protection of the right of a citizen of one State to enter and to leave another State.[1] Under Eunique v. Powell, the Ninth Circuit recognized the right to international travel as a protected right under substantive due process.[1] The Supreme Court has also had some things to say with regard to international travel, which can be seen in Apthekar v. Secretary of State, which quoted Kent v. Dulles in saying “this Court declared that the right to travel abroad is ‘an important aspect of the citizen’s ‘liberty“ guaranteed in the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.”


for ammendmetns talking about having lawyers look at the materials (I guess they wanted spies to review) saying that person is a terrorist

kindof different

really you should jsut get notice and be able to appeal



-------

an obvious one: due process requires for "adequate notice," travel ban was a surprise even to the government...


here is a generic list of what due process should involve:


https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/due_process
	An unbiased tribunal.
    Notice of the proposed action and the grounds asserted for it.
    Opportunity to present reasons why the proposed action should not be taken.
    The right to present evidence, including the right to call witnesses.
    The right to know opposing evidence.
    The right to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
    A decision based exclusively on the evidence presented.
    Opportunity to be represented by counsel.
    Requirement that the tribunal prepare a record of the evidence presented.
    Requirement that the tribunal prepare written findings of fact and reasons for its decision.


didn't get notice

or any opportunity to appeal


here's something:

procedural due process requirements for no-fly lists


https://scholars.unh.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=https://www.google.com/&httpsredir=1&article=1060&context=unh_lr

not well written


on court arguments:



https://www.wsj.com/articles/court-ruling-on-trump-travel-ban-focuses-on-due-process-1486688778
	Ruling on Trump Travel Ban Asserts Court Role in Review of Presidential Policies
Judges emphatically reject view that president can dictate, without judicial review, who enters the country
A protestor against President Donald Trump's travel ban standing outside the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco on Tuesday.
A protestor against President Donald Trump's travel ban standing outside the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco on Tuesday. Photo: noah berger/Reuters
By Joe Palazzolo and
Jacob Gershman
Updated Feb. 10, 2017 12:00 a.m. ET
328 COMMENTS

The president’s national-security judgments are subject to review by federal judges, an appeals court ruled Thursday, as it blessed parts of a lawsuit challenging the Trump administration’s ban on travel from seven predominantly Muslim countries, while reserving judgment on others.

The ruling by the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals on Thursday bars the administration from enforcing its 90-day ban on travelers from Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen, pending the outcome of a lawsuit filed by Washington state and Minnesota.

The lawsuit claims the policy discriminates against Muslims and violates the Constitution’s guarantee of due process. The Trump administration has justified the executive order on grounds that it is vital to protect national security.

The states’ win Thursday wasn’t complete. While the court seemed to warm to the states’ due process claims in its unanimous, 29-page opinion, the three-judge panel made a point of deferring its decision on the “serious allegations” of religious discrimination until later in the case.

The U.S. government had asked the Ninth Circuit to hold that U.S. District Judge James Robart in Seattle abused his discretion when he issued an order last week freezing Mr. Trump’s directive, which also halted the admission of refugees for at least four months.

Justice Department lawyers argued that the president can dictate who enters the country in service of national security, and the courts have no authority to second guess him.

The judges emphatically rejected that view, describing in their opinion a strong role for the judiciary in reviewing a president’s policies. “[I]t is beyond question that the federal judiciary retains the authority to adjudicate constitutional challenges to executive action,” wrote the panel.

The panel expressed reservations about the Trump administration’s justification for the immigration order but wasn’t prepared to delve into the religious-discrimination claims absent more evidence. The sides will presumably now uncover those facts before the lower court in Seattle.

The court gave more weight to the states’ argument that the order violates basic tenets of due process.

The federal government “has not shown the executive order provides what due process requires,” such as a notice and a hearing before restricting someone’s ability to travel, wrote the panel, which included Judge William C. Canby Jr. and Judge Michelle Friedland, both Democratic appointees, and Judge​Richard Clifton, a Republican appointee.
Related

    Appeals Court Rules Against Trump Travel Ban
    Senator Says Trump Open to Immigration Overhaul
    Trump Lashes Out as Senator, Others Recount Court Nominee’s Criticism
    Kellyanne Conway Urges Public to Buy Ivanka Trump’s Branded Products
    The President’s Wild Start Churns Domestic Politics Around the World
    Fight Over Travel Ban Won’t End With Appeals Ruling
    How a GOP Bill Led to Countries Named in Order
    Read the Court’s Decision

The government had asked the appeals court to carve Judge Robart’s order so that it applied only to green-card holders, allowing the federal government to enforce the ban against other categories of foreigners.

But the Ninth Circuit said such a fix would ignore the due-process rights of others, such as visa holders who have been in the U.S. but left temporarily or wish to leave and return, as well as refugees and others who have relationships with U.S. citizens or institutions.

Besides, the court said, the order’s impact on green-card holders remains unsettled.

Just days after releasing the order, White House counsel Donald McGahn issued a memo clarifying that the ban wouldn’t apply to legal permanent residents of the U.S. Mr. McGahn called his interpretation of the order “authoritative guidance.”

But the judges were little reassured by Mr. McGahn’s guidance, suggesting that they couldn’t be sure “in light of the Government’s shifting interpretations” that such a reading, not coming directly from the president, carried enough weight.

“The White House counsel is not the President, and he is not known to be in the chain of command for any of the Executive Departments,” the judges wrote.


appeals court less concerned about non-LPRs affected than 9th circuit


------


what was doj up against in wash v. trump?

especially at that moment before yates made decision--ban "still applied to LPRs"

if trump wanted ban to survive, would need to challenge TRO, and presumably that's something Yates and DOJ were considering--how could they do that?

here is oral orgment in feds emergency motion to shoot down the TRO:

http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1702/07/sitroom.02.html
	PURCELL: I'd make two points on that, your honor. First of all, we are at the pleading stage. We have not had an opportunity -- we filed a complaint and a motion for temporary restraining order, and so for standing purposes, all the plausible allegations in our complaint are treated as true.

	Now, we've alleged that there are thousands of people in Washington, thousands more in Minnesota who are originally from these countries who are not yet citizens here. We know the way the order was originally interpreted -- excuse me, your honor -- defendants originally interpreted the order and said that it covered lawful permanent residents. We know that there are roughly half a million lawful permanent residents from these seven countries in the United States.

	Now, they've changed their mind about five times about whether it applies to those people in the -- in the times since the order issued; and now they say that it doesn't. But at the time the state filed its complaint, they had not yet made their position clear about that. And -- and I would say that that argument is not moot yet, because under the voluntary cessation standard, until they change the order to make that crystal clear, that claim -- they can't just say, "Well, now we say it doesn't apply to them, so don't worry about it." I mean, that's half a million people who are in the United States who, overnight, at least according to government initially, lost their right to travel, to come in and out of the country, to visit their relatives. And several people... 


now the arugment is whether or not the point on applying to LPRs is moot for granting stay (this after McGahn clarification)

they argue that fed "change mind about five times" if applies to LPRs or not, not "crystal clear"

interestin, says at time complaint filed, they had not "made their position clear"

but position does seem clear--even when they said "being LPR is dispotive," that means EO still applies, they just grant waivers according to provisions of EO (and that still didn't work apaprently)

but this illustrates Yates had an even tougher case to make at the time she made her decision

actually, I think still bad even afterward: "voluntary cessation" doctrine says case not moot if defendents stop doing some bad thing after litigation


	CLIFTON: According to your position, why shouldn't we limit the order, the temporary restraining order, reach to those people who you've got a strong case for like the LPRs? Why should -- why should the temporary restraining order reach beyond that? That seemed to be the government's principle argument, that it was overbroad. Why isn't it overbroad?


judge agrees they have a "strong case" for LPRs

wants to know why not just limit to not apply to them (good question)

9th circuit I think screwed up--harder to argue due process for e.g. illegal immigrant, dunn about visa holder

religios grounds apply, what Purcell says: still violates establishment and equal protection


http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1702/07/sitroom.02.html
	CANBY: It's Judge Canby. As far as the Establishment Clause claim goes, the government takes a position, I think, that -- that in weighing the validity of your Establishment Clause claim, you're confined to the four corners of the instrument. What's your comment on that?

	PURCELL: Your honor, I think the case law shows that that's wrong. I think -- I think it was Judge Clifton who pointed out -- or Judge Friedland, I'm sorry, or maybe both. Kerry versus Din says exactly the opposite. That if there's -- if the plaintiff makes plausible allegations, sufficiently supported of bad faith, the court can look behind the motives.

	And in those cases, just to be clear, those are cases where the -- the case had to do with excluding an alien who had never been here and had no right to be here. So if anything, the court should take a more -- a harder look at the real motives in a case where there are significant impacts on people who do live here, who've been here for many years, who are longtime residents and who clearly are entitled, themselves, to constitutional rights of due process and equal protection, unlike in Kerry and Mandell, where really it was, you know -- the rights being harmed were of the people overseas. It was their -- the people here who were asserting them.

	[18:40:12] CLIFTON: Well, we have to be very careful about that. The assertion that the court took up the claim only because, in the case of Kerry versus Din, Miss Din was a U.S. citizen.


argues that since long term u.s. residents were screwed over, plaintiffs have a right to look at motive behind why


	The number of people affected by the executive order, do you have any information as to what proportion would fit within the category of Washington residents or lawful...

	PURCELL: Your honor...

	CLIFTON: ... people with visas? I suspect it's a small fraction.

	PURCELL: I'd make two points on that, your honor. First of all, we are at the pleading stage. We have not had an opportunity -- we filed a complaint and a motion for temporary restraining order, and so for standing purposes, all the plausible allegations in our complaint are treated as true.


wtf does that mean

ok I guess since it's for a TRO, they aren't going to like do a full investigation (doesn't make sense for something quick like TRO)



--------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0005-0001.pdf


this lawsuit looks bad


a bunch of celebrities suing Trump along with CAIR, not even sure if any of them actually affected by it

john doe plaintiffs better

one LPR says he can no longer leave U.S. due to EO

all LPRs suing have same complaint: that if they left U.S., they wouldn't be able to come back

I guess is a legit reason to sue but not as strong as being stranded or detained and sent back when you're a U.S. resident

this was filed Jan 30


...


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-CA-0083-0002.pdf

Vayeghan v. Trump

Filed Jan 28

visa holder petitioning to not be detained/sent back

son lives in U.S., petition says could have got a green card and got citizenship


...


Doe v. Trump


Filed Jan 28

dropped later after other cases moving forward

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0027-0003.pdf

petitioner detained, scheuled for return flight

goes over a bit how EO violates travellers 5th ammendment rights

doesn't say if they are residents


=------


https://www.appleseednetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Nixon-Peabody-%E2%80%93-Memo-on-LPRs-February-2017.pdf


this memo is good sums up all the cases on immigration wrt LPRs and trmp's travel ban


pg 7

says "initial LPRs", never been in U.S. yet, not covered by initial fixes to EO

that covers Aziz I think

pg 8

summary of official DHS and State positions on EO

missing supposed statement from DHS on saturday?


pg 11

	The EO, as initially enacted, made no disction between LPRs who had preivously been admitted to the United States--and thus should hav ebeen treated as returning LPRs, except in the limited circumstances ot hose deemed to be seeking admission pursuant to...



pg 15

impling OLC dropped the ball in approving the EO as it applied to LPRs?


pg 16

goes over court cases


pg 17

Almasmari et al 17-cv-10310 in Easter District of Michican, Arab American Civil Rights League, et al. v. Trump was decided by Judge Victoria Roberts to enjoin the EO from applying to all LPRs on Feb 3rd


goes over pending cases then at time of writing


------

court cases involving stranded or removed LPRs toughest to beat

which were Yates facing at the end of Jan 30?


https://www.appleseednetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Nixon-Peabody-%E2%80%93-Memo-on-LPRs-February-2017.pdf

pg 17

Ali v Trump

https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15604

filed Jan 30

LPR trying to get son into U.S.

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0001.pdf

petition for class relief, class being LPRs and citizens who want their family members to join them in U.S.



Wash v. Trump

filed Jan 30

indirectly applied



Aziz v. Trump

filed Jan 28, 29?

LPRs detained



Sarsour v. Trump

LRPs concerend they couldn't leave



Loughalam v. Trump

Filed Jan 29



Tawfeeq v. DHS

https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15634&search=source%7Cgeneral%3BspecialCollection%7C44%3Borderby%7CfilingYear%3B

filed Jan 30

Tawfeeq was detained at Atlanta

doesn't say anything about class action from quick search



Doe. v. Trump

filed Jan 30



Asali v. Trump

https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15616

filed Jan 31



Hagig v. Trump

https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15632

filed Jan 31

argued threat of being bared reentry violated constitution


ACRL v. Trump

https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15612

filed Jan 31



...


so she was looking at:

Tawfeeq v. Trump


Ali v. Trump


Doe v. Trump


Aziz and Boston cases

Wash v. Trump would have been even harder to argue against while confusion on LPRs was still there


Tawfeeq v. Trump just one guy, I think detained LPRs already covered by Boston case

Ali. v. Trump the issue of splitting families for lawful U.S. residents, hard to argue keeping out someone's 6 year old kid is helping national security

Doe v. Trump big one, covering stranded LPRs


Ali. v. Trump argues equal protection and violating existing anti-immigration statues

argues (I think) deprived of "liberty interest in family life" without due process, some defendants U.S. citizens

can you stop a U.S. citizen from bringing over their kid in the name of "national security?" guessing not. Dunno case history but seems like this one would be hard to beat too.


so this clarifies DOJ situation on Jan 30

confusion still ongoing with LPRs (Doe v. Trump says plaintiff was still stranded on Jan 30), DOJ just got slaughtered in two hearings (others?), now three big cases land on their desk: one on split families involving U.S. citizens, one on lawul residents stranded, and a suit by Wash state threatening to end the whole thing.


------

https://case.edu/executive-order-updates/docs/f.pdf

McGahn memo, if taken as authorative, nixed Doe v. Trump

what about Ali v. Trump?


it kept going, changed with second EO, eventually absorbed kindof into Hawaii v. Trump


why did gov settle and drop Doe v. Trump and not Ali v. Trump?

I guess Doe v. Trump more dire situation for plaintiffs and gets to heart of shady actions by Trump admin


Doe v. Trmp wanted Trump admin to declare the EO applying to LPRs unconstitutional and unlawful, pay for lawyer fees, in addition to stopping enforcement for LPRs


Ali. v. Trump wanted court to "Declare Section 3(c) of the Executive Order is contrary to the statue and the Constitution" and "Issue an order enjoining Defendants from applying Section 3(c) of the Executive Order to Plaintiffs and proposed class members" and pay legal fees

confused with Ali v. Trump class: saying it's all LPRs? so I guess Ali v. Trump asked for same thing?

some of the plantiffs included kids, family members of residents with immigrant visas. So this is broader class? would assume class is family members of residents and residents

97 says it: seek to represent class of all nationals from 7 countries who have or will apply for immigrant visa and visa petitioners for those nationals affected by EO

seems broad?

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0004.pdf

Feb 2 doc seems more clear

people petitioning for family members to come, and "beneficiearies of thsose petitions."


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0006.pdf

motion for injunction wanted all LPRs let in as well as let in family members of U.S. residents


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0011.pdf

Feb 27, DOJ argues that EO already stopped by another case


gov also basically argued merits aren't as strong in Ali case, petitioning for family member to come over takes a long time anyway:

https://www.npr.org/2017/05/22/528944683/seattle-mom-sues-trump-to-stop-travel-ban-and-bring-her-son-home
	The administration argues that a pause on visas for immigrants from Somalia and five other countries is necessary to protect national security. At a hearing in March, the Justice Department's lawyer, Chad Readler, questioned whether any of the plaintiffs would be harmed.

	"The three-month pause is unlikely to have much if any effect on most of the applicants," Readler said. "None of them under the current system are eligible even to come to this country. Most of them have a number of steps in front of them still."

(if intent is to be Muslim ban, couldn't they just do a "temporary pause" again?)


...


so why bury Doe v. Trump? best guess: it forced them to finally take a position on the "confusion" around whether or not the ban applied to LPRs. As of Jan 30, Ali v. Trump did not have this quality. The admin kept the EO's applicability to LPRs ambiguous enough Jan 27-30 to lead to unwinnable court cases for Yates without having to take full responsibility themselves. If they had taken the position then that the ban did apply to LPRs, it would be immediately clear that the blame for all this fell on them. By keeping it up in the air and acting confused until deciding the obvious thing that you can't bar residents from entry, they give themselves the opportunity to play it off like a mistake.


------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15634&search=source%7Cgeneral%3BspecialCollection%7C44%3Borderby%7CfilingYear%3B


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0001.pdf


these two mention some of the official orders by Trump admin on ban


------


Aziz for LPRs detained

lead plantiffs initial LPRs, claimed they were forced to sign away LPR status

summary of Aziz case: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/30/trump-travel-ban-yemenis-coerced-relinquish-green-card


ammended doc says Aziz bros lied to, tricked into signing away LPR and forced to be detained, ended up stranded in ethiopia

if remember right Aziz put TRO on ban for dulles, but really just made explicit can't detain or send back LPRs at dulles


DHS says this:

	We found that the lack of a public or congressional relations strategy significantly hampered CBP. For example, in Aziz v. Trump, a federal court had temporarily enjoined CBP at Dulles airport in Virginia from returning LPRs. The court had also ordered CBP to "permit lawyers access to all [LPRs] being detained at Dulles .... " CBP complied with the order not to remove LPRs and soon after the TRO issued, processed for entry the remaining five LPRs held in secondary inspection. However, CBP did not communicate that LPRs were not being denied access to lawyers either to the public or in response to Congressional inquiries, resulting in significant public protests and suspicion that CBP was not complying with a court order.


says could not remove LPRs, had to give them lawyers


Nixon Peabody LLC:

	The Aziz petitioners detail their experiences in their complaint. Although they were LPRs and had "valid entry documents," CPB prevented them from leaving IAD. Petition for Writ of Habeas Corpus and Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, E.D. Va., Case No. 17-cv- 116, Dkt. 1 (Jan. 28, 2017), ¶2. CPB detained the petitioners when they arrived at IAD on the morning of Saturday, January 28, 2017. Id. at 'Irlf 25-26. They were held that entire day, without access to counsel. Id


detained for a day without lawyers


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0002.pdf

petition for TRO was on behalf of "50 to 60 Lawful Permanent Residents" detained at Dulles.

says believ they will be detained, will suffer irreparable harm if not issued TRO (doesn't Darweesh apply? maybe timing close), would lose legal rights if detained (difference for people in vs. outside U.S.)

Argues they can't understand legal rights if denied access to lawyers, have right to enter as LPRs.

so first was petition for habeaus corpus, then petitioned for lawyers to be able to visit and for them not to be removed for 7 days.

"likeliness to win" outlined in Habeaus corpus petition

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0003.pdf

lead petitioners Tarq and Ammar Aziz two brothers 19 and 21, initial LPRs, landed at IAD to see father, detained for a day without a lawyer.

lawyers ask: is there sufficient justification for them to be detained?

but basically crux of argument is: these people need lawyers, and might be legally screwed if deported, so let lawyers see them and don't deport in meantime.

Argues fifth amendent due process, establishment clause rights violated, against 1101(a)(13(c)), Rosenberg v. Fleuti

so should get right: asked for multiple things

first asked for them to be released

what happened to that?

then same day ask well at least don't deport and let them see lawyers


later on 30th new petition of habeas corpus, saying they are being bullied and tricked into giving up LPR status

Feb 3rd judge extends original TRO, orders virginia to list LPRs and visa holders detained or removed due to EO


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0032.pdf

dude had rought life after civil war in Yemen, wanted to come to America

finding of fact on who was affected?

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0057.pdf

maybe different from what court asked

does say they didn't buy McGahn memo making it moot for purpose of evaluating EO


------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0029-0001.pdf

	pg 10

	55. Where Congress has granted statutory rights and authorized procedures applicable to arriving and present non-citizens, minimum due process rights attach to those statutory rights.

	56. Sections 3 and 5 of the Executive Order conflict with the statutory rights and procedures directed by Congress. In issuing and implementing the Executive Order, Defendants have violated the procedural due process guarantees of the Fifth Amendment.


I guess it wouldn't have violated 5th ammendment if Congress hadn't set up rules for non-citizens for returning to country or how they can be detained and deported?

idk but doesn't sound right--like legal precedent still establishes rights of non-citizens, doesn't it?


did second ban violate 5th ammendment protections? still not completely sure. I get it for LPRs I think (can't treat them as seeking admission on return, 5th ammendment applies), but others?

https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15626

Hawaii v. Trump also saying due process problems for 2nd EO

sup court allowed except for people with "bona fide relationship" with U.S. residents--maybe there is statute for this class of people that courts interpret as giving them 5th ammendment protections?

sup court apparently ignored arguments that ban was motivated by religious animus


------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-HI-0004-0001.pdf
	pg 26

	101. Non-citizens, including lawful permanent residents and non-immigrants holding valid visas, have a liberty interest in leaving and reentering the country, and in being free from unlawful detention.

	102. The Due Process Clause establishes a minimum level of procedural protection before those liberty interests can be deprived. A non-citizen must be given and opportunity to present her case effectively, which includes a hearing and some consideration of individual circumstances.

	103. In addition, where Congress has granted statutory rights and authorized procedures applicable to arriving and present non-citizens, rights under the Due Process Clause attach to those statutory rights.

	104. Sections 3 and 5 of the Executive Order, and Defendants' actions implementing the Executive Order, deprive non-citizens arriving in the United States, including in Hawai'i, of their statutory rights to apply for asylum and withholding of removal in the United States.


https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/politics/trump-compare-travel-ban/
	Unlike the previous order, which went into effect immediately, this one will be implemented in 10 days, on March 16, and excludes Iraq. It also excludes green-card holders, dual nationals and people who have been granted asylum or refugee status.


new ban no longer applies to LPRs, people already granted asylum.

Hawaii I think argues that the ban denies right to travel to visa holders residing in Hawaii without due process ("opportunity to present her case effectively" including "hearing and some consideration of individual circumstances"), also violates rights attached to statues saying non-citizens arriving can apply for asylum and rules for when they can be removed (If I read right).

court doc above is for old ban not new one

so saying not just visa holders by LPRs affected in this way, which does have pretty clear sounding legal precedent

can't keep EO up if it doesn't give due process to lawful residents who want to leave country and come back

what is argument against second EO?


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-HI-0004-0011.pdf

pg 52

still says violates due process, cite 9th circuit decision in Wash v. Trump that limiting EO TRO to just LPRs still violates 5th ammdendment.

Says would "leave out" those with "viable due process claims," including illegal immigrants, refugees, and "citizens who have an interest in specific non-citizens' ability to travel to the United States.

pg 53 cites history for due process for denying citizen due process from trying to get family member into the U.S. (sounds like Ali case).

Maybe this is why sup court enabled TRO except for these people?

https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/politics/trump-compare-travel-ban/
	The 9th Circuit ruled the original travel ban was unlikely to be upheld in court, finding it violated due process, which requires the government to give sufficient time and opportunity for people affected by the ban to respond. The court found the ban did not give the affected people advance notice of the change to their status or a fair process to contest it.

	But there’s a complexity here — different groups have different due-process rights. Permanent residents are entitled to a more robust process than temporary visa holders and refugees, who have more rights than visa applicants, who have more rights than people without American ties, according to Leon Fresco, an immigration lawyer at Holland and Knight.

	That means the government can comply with due process by creating a process for recourse or by applying the law only to people with minimal rights.

	The new ban took the second path, exempting all current visa holders and allowing affected visa applicants to apply for waivers.

	That doesn’t resolve the due-process issue entirely, however. Americans with an “interest” in a specific foreign national being admitted to the country (such as the American’s family members) have due-process rights, according to the 9th Circuit’s ruling. Yet the new ban gives them no clear avenue for recourse.

	Since there is no outlined process for those people to petition for their or their family’s lawful entry, the ban may still violate due-process rights, Fresco said.


right, saying second EO violated due process for those citizens

so Ali case important in that way


------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0029-0001.pdf


"prayer for relief" asks court to declare large parts of ban unconstitutional and to stop enforcing them

I think this case got dropped after new EO?

which one went to the supreme court?

could Darweesh have gone to supreme court and killed ban?

I think problem Darweesh exemplified most was the ban violating due process for people coming from dangerous countries seeking refugee status. Would just send them back. But I think they are allowed to bring a case that they should be allowed to stay.

so e.g. under EO, if a boat of Syrian refugees arrived in a U.S. port, they would just be sent back without being able to make their case.

second EO still had a problem with this I think? but supreme court didn't think so? Maybe different for Darweesh, since he was working with U.S. in Iraq and 2nd ban removed Iraq...

darweesh was ammended with a new plaintiff though, an LPR wanting to know if she would be able to come back to U.S. Sup court on similar cases before have ruled someone like her would have right to due process in trying to come back, and so an EO that violated that would be unconstitutional.


------

https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-11-08/travel-ban-agreement-left-1-400-iraqis-in-deportation-limbo
	In the July ruling, U.S. District Judge Mark Goldsmith said the removal process couldn’t be rushed because the group was returning to a country where they might face a “grisly fate” including persecution and torture. The judge said he was obliged to intervene in the attempted deportation because the government was on the cusp of violating fundamental rights of liberty protected by the U.S. Constitution.


so Trump was about to send someone who got approved to come to U.S. to escape persecution and torture back, which sounds like it should be illegal...

and it is, I think, because of statutes 


https://www.texastribune.org/2017/01/28/trumps-travel-ban-leads-detainment-immigrants-texa/
	The American Civil Liberties Union and other organizations filed the lawsuit in New York early Saturday on behalf Alshawi and another Iraqi national. Alshawi was detained at John F. Kennedy International Airport despite being issued a valid visa earlier this month to reunite with his wife and 7-year-old son in the United States.

	Alshawi’s wife had worked for a U.S. contractor but fled Iraq with their son after being targeted by insurgents, according to the court filing. She applied for refugee status for her and their son, and they are now legal permanent residents in Houston.

rights violated for family members of Alshawi? Darweesh?


https://www.rte.ie/news/2017/0128/848344-us-politics-refugees/
	Division over constitutionality of order

	Legal experts were divided on whether this order would be constitutional. 

	Mr Trump's order had been expected to include a directive about setting up "safe zones" for Syrian refugees inside the country, but no such language was included yesterday.

	The order may also affect special refugee programs for Iraqis who worked for the US government as translators after the 2003 invasion of Iraq.


https://law.yale.edu/studying-law-yale/clinical-and-experiential-learning/our-clinics/worker-and-immigrant-rights-advocacy-clinic/darweesh-et-al-v-trump-et-al
	Early the next morning, on January 28, 2017, the Yale Law School Worker and Immigrant Rights Advocacy Clinic, together with the American Civil Liberties Union, the National Immigration Law Center, the International Refugee Assistance Project, and Kilpatrick Townsend & Stockton LLP, filed suit on behalf of Hameed Khalid Darweesh, an Iraqi husband and father of three, and Haider Sameer Abdulkhaleq Alshawi, an Iraqi husband and father. Both Mr. Darweesh and Mr. Alshawi were detained after arriving at JFK Airport in New York City on January 27, 2017, shortly after the EO was signed. Both had been approved for travel and entry to the United States, and they were flying with valid documentation. The Petitioners alleged that the application of the Executive Order to them violated their Fifth Amendment procedural and substantive due process rights and was illegal according to the immigration statutes and the Administrative Procedure Act.



https://law.yale.edu/system/files/documents/pdf/Clinics/1-_complaint.pdf

ied entry to the United
States, 
and subject to the threat of return to the country from which their travel originated, regardless of 
their presentation of valid entry documents, their status in the prior country, and possible claims 
qualifying them for protection under 
8 USC 
1101
(a)
(42
)
and 8 U.S.C. § 1225(b)(1)(A)(ii).




https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/8/1225
	(ii) Claims for asylum

	If an immigration officer determines that an alien (other than an alien described in subparagraph (F)) who is arriving in the United States or is described in clause (iii) is inadmissible under section 1182(a)(6)(C) or 1182(a)(7) of this title and the alien indicates either an intention to apply for asylum under section 1158 of this title or a fear of persecution, the officer shall refer the alien for an interview by an asylum officer under subparagraph (B).


I guess this means they have due process rights because of this statute?


https://law.yale.edu/system/files/documents/pdf/Clinics/1-_complaint.pdf
	The United States government is obligated by United States and international law to hear the asylum claims of noncitizens presenting themselves at United States borders and ports of entry.  The Immigration and Nationality Act provides that “[a]ny alien who is physically present in the United States or who arrives in the United States. . . irrespective of such alien’s status, may applyfor asylum in accordance with this section or, where applicable, section 235(b).” 8 U.S.C. § 1158(a)(1);see also id. § 1225(b)(1)(A)(ii).


I think I get it--he was supposed to be able to apply for asylum. Anyone showing up in similar situation must be afforded that.


this is under section alleging due process violations

"having presented themselves at a U.S. por tof entr,y Petitioners are entitled to apply for asylum and to be recieved and processed by United States authorities."

	...Respondents’  actions  in  denying  Petitioners  the  opportunity  to  apply  for  asylum, taken pursuant to the EO, violate the procedural due process rights guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment.  


http://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1418&context=ylpr


says a controversial issue

pg 4

"Refugee Act of 1980" established "statutory right to seek asylum."

court resolved cases on this on statutory grounds, sup court never answered if there is constitutional right to seek asylum

"As a result, the question of whether aliens on U.S. soil have a constitutionally protected right to petition for asylum has engendered deep conflict among the circuit courts of appeals"

so I guess same thing could happen to this EO: say it is unlawful against statutes, but would have to go to supreme court to say if right to asylum is protected by 5th ammendmetn or not

article written 2000


http://jaapl.org/content/jaapl/45/3/365.full.pdf

says "Due process rights emerged from the Fifth, Sixth, and Fourteenth Constitutional Amendmetns and have been expanded to include this population through several sequential United States Supreme Court Cases."

so part of "controversy" or is settled that refugees have due process right to apply for asylum?

Maybe not necessary--either way point is Trump admin put ban in legal jeoproady needlessly


https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2017/02/09/17-35105.pdf
	In the district court, the States argued that the Executive Order violates the procedural due process rights of various aliens in at least three independent ways.  First, section 3(c) denies  re-entry  to  certain  lawful  permanent  residents  and  non-immigrant      visaholders      without      constitutionally      sufficient  notice  and  an  opportunity  to  respond.    Second,  section 3(c) prohibits certain lawful permanent residents and non-immigrant  visaholders  from  exercising  their  separate  and  independent  constitutionally  protected  liberty  interests  in  travelling  abroad  and  thereafter  re-entering  the  United  States.  Third, section 5 contravenes the procedures provided by  federal  statute  for  refugees  seeking  asylum  and  related  relief in the United States.  The district court held generally in the TRO that the States were likely to prevail on the merits of  their  due  process  claims,  without  discussing  or  offering  analysis as to any specific alleged violation.


so there it is--added to merits that court argued states likely to win on. So Darweesh and others in class contributed to ban being struck down and kept that way.


...


for darweesh and Alshawi, not even that--if I read right were already granted asylum, then denied entry into U.S.

https://law.yale.edu/system/files/documents/pdf/Clinics/1-_complaint.pdf

pg 2 says they got "Follow to Join Visa"

does someone who got this visa have right to petition if barred from entry to U.S.? you'd think so...

what is case history?

and maybe if no history, could argue this case would win in higher courts on merits? these people got screwed over and sounds like should be illegal

petition says they were "denied right to apply for asylum"

pg 10 (37) says Darweesh not being allowed to apply for asylum to stop being removed

	41. Upon information and belief, Mr. Alshawiwasdeemed admissible for a Follow to Join (FTJ) visacategory F2A (joining spouse and child)awarded by the U.S. Department of State on January 11, 2017. See generally 8 U.S.C. § 1157(c)(2)(A); 8 C.F.R. § 207.7(a) (spouse or child of refugee “shall be granted refugee status if accompanying or following-to-join the principal alien”).


so Alshawi's family being persecuted, assassinated for working for same defense contractor he did

family LPRs, applied for FTJ visa (visa for allowing family members to join family in U.S.) for Alshawi

so if I read right, hadn't applied for asylum, FTJ visa granted I guess based on family ties in U.S.


pg 7

Darweesh worked as interpreter for U.S. military. Targeted, terrorists driving around asking for his name, shady police entering his home, fleeing multiple times

got "special immigrant visa"

Congress made Iraq SIV for safety and refuge for iraqis who served U.S. military and face persecution

after entering U.S., SIV holder gets green card in the mail


no idea if case like this ever happened for SIV holder, I guess it's a new thing

but he gets a green card in the mail almost instantly (in U.S. bueracracy time) after landing

so you'd think they would have good reasons to rule in his favor

kindof same problem as "initial LPR"



https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2017/01/28/2-iraqis-denied-us-entry-challenge-trumps-visa-order/97183820/
	Judge Ann Donnelly blocked the order late Saturday and told government officials not to remove holders of immigrant and non-immigrant visas from Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen. She ruled the Iraqis "have a strong likelihood of success" in in a full hearing on the merits of the case to prove that the order violates their due-process and equal-protection provisions of the Constitution.


https://law.yale.edu/system/files/area/clinic/document/2017.01.28_emergency_motion_for_stay.pdf

pg 13

says "for purposes of this application, there is a likelihood of success on the merits"



https://law.yale.edu/system/files/area/clinic/document/2017.01.28_emergency_motion_for_stay.pdf

pg 11


	They were on U.S. soil and they certainly can't be sent back without, at minimum, an asylum hearing and a Convention Against Torture -- I mean that is basic law.


Court seems to take her word for it, I guess that's what statutes say

was anybody actually sent back to a dangerous country?


