

------


http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-live-updates-9th-circuit-arguments-the-3-judges-deciding-whether-to-1486495626-htmlstory.html

Stay decision written by Friedland, Canby, and Cliffton


------

http://heavy.com/news/2017/02/richard-clifton-judge-ninth-circuit-court-of-appeals-donald-trump-travel-immigration-ban-hawaii-democrat-republican-president-george-bush/

Cliffton comes off conservative in oral arguments, but might have just been busting the guys balls.

Is Republican but "well-liked" by dems

says by the book guy, not much activism type stuff

appointed by George Bush


------


http://heavy.com/news/2017/02/michelle-t-friedland-federal-judge-ninth-circuit-court-of-appeals-donald-trump-democrat-republican-barack-obama-appointment-liberal-husband-married-travel-ban/

Friedland appointed by Barack Obama and was controversial. Split vote, needed tie-breaker, Republicans fillibuster

Irony: ends up helping Trump... all they'd need to do to end him was be unbiased and impartial

Friedland in with sketchy lawyer activist groups

	Peter Edelman, chair of the group’s board of directors, was once quoted as saying that the group’s goals include “countering right-wing distortions of our Constitution” and “debunking conservative buzzwords such as ‘originalism’ and ‘strict construction’ that use neutral-sounding language but all too often lead to conservative policy outcomes.”


------


http://heavy.com/news/2017/02/william-c-cameron-canby-jr-politics-political-party-democrat-republican-president-donald-trump-ninth-circuit-rulings-opinions-appointed-appointment-arizona-law-wife-peace-corps/

Canby most senior guy, appointed by Jimmy Carter

Carter not so great, what about Canby?

established peace corps in Africa and expert on American Indian Law, wrote book on it.

got beat down by Supreme court after he tried to argue Feds could tell local Sheriffs what to do


------

I guess Cliffton the conservative, Friedland the liberal, Canby the tie-breaker?

http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-live-updates-9th-circuit-arguments-the-3-judges-deciding-whether-to-1486495626-htmlstory.html
	Clifton is seen as a moderate conservative, while the other judges are seen as moderate liberals. The appeals court, based in San Francisco, is regarded as one of the most liberal in the country.


maybe not?

Anyone one of them could be spies putting in bad arguments on purpose


------

http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/444673/ninth-circuit-oral-argument-trump-travel-ban

Even still, pro-Trump Russian spy lawyers don't have much to say about judges except they are liberal


them on the arguments:

http://www.nationalreview.com/article/444720/washington-state-v-trump-ninth-circuit-presidents-attorneys-cite-constitution
	President Trump’s legal counsel argued primarily: 1) No non-citizen has a right to entry into the United States. Supreme Court cases such as Kerry v. Din (2015) also hold that a citizen does not have a constitutional right for a non-citizen’s relative (even a spouse) to live with that person in the United States. Interestingly, Kerry proceeded from the Ninth Circuit to the Supreme Court, so that case history might shed some light on how this panel will rule in the current case.


http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1702/07/sitroom.02.html
	FLENTJE: Right. And the state doesn't have the sort of constitutional rights that the wife in Din had. The wife in Din was asserting her own...

	...CLIFTON: Well, we'd like to get to an answer to that question, because it speaks back to the standing issue.

	If the order said Muslims cannot be admitted, would anybody have standing to challenge that?

	FLENTJE: I think Mandel and Din give a route to make a constitutional challenge, if there were such an order. It would be by a U.S. citizen with a connection to someone seeking entry.

	[18:25:02]

	This is a far cry from that situation. I'd like...


sounds like they argued the opposite of what national review said they argued


	...2) The president has broad discretion to implement a temporary pause through executive action on foreign nationals that seek entry into the United States. In Article I, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution, immigration and naturalization as a subject matter is a power fully reserved to Congress. Congress has, through its legislation in 8 U.S.C. 1182(f), delegated broad authority to the president to suspend entry of all non-citizens or any class of citizens (as either immigrants or non-immigrants — meaning regardless of the purpose of their entry or visit) whenever the president in his sole discretion finds that entry of those non-citizens would be “detrimental to the interests of the United States.” Trump’s counsel was correct that this is a very broad, unilateral discretion.


but the next section says you can't discriminate on race, religion...

ditto for the constitution

is this guy a lawyer or just blowing smoke up everybody's ass?

https://twitter.com/jennaellisorg?lang=en

she is a constituional law attorney


http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-38766364
	In his order, Mr Trump quotes a 1952 immigration law that gives the president the ability to suspend entry "of all aliens or any class of aliens" into the US when he deems it "detrimental to the interests of the United States."

	A 1965 revision of the law, however, says individuals cannot be "discriminated against in the issuance of an immigrant visa" because of their "race, sex, nationality, place of birth or place of residence".


funny

it actually doesn't include "religion" in the list...


	...3) The injunction imposed by the Washington State District Court was overbroad because it imposed the injunction nationwide, not just against specific, identifiable individuals harmed or even exclusive to the State of Washington. Trump’s counsel argued that even if the Ninth Circuit held that the injunction should remain in place, the Court should limit the scope of the injunction just to those specific individuals where the State could provide evidence of harm or limit it to the State of Washington. This is a good argument in the alternative to at least limit the impact of the Washington State District Court’s injunction.


Isn't that kindof dumb though if they could just travel to Washington then go interstate

decision cited another decision for reason not to limit geographically

	...We should be wary of any judicial activism for political reasons because this could have far-reaching implications for U.S. foreign policy and national-security interests.


they don't have an argument


a better written one:

http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/444784/why-ninth-circuit-ruled-against-trumps-refugee-order
	The takeaway is that the court didn’t actually resolve a lot of the hotly contested issues here, and cooler heads in the Administration should probably try revising the executive order and presenting more thorough evidence in its favor before taking the case up to the Supreme Court


"should try revising order"

they know they are toast

	...The court wisely avoided ruling on the states’ flimsy claim to “parens patriae” standing to represent every citizen of their state and then extend that to non-resident aliens, a theory foreclosed by Supreme Court precedent dating back to 1923.


then why did Ali v. Trump get absorbed into hawaii v. Trump


	...The Ninth Circuit panel also concluded, without citing any support whatsoever, that the states had standing to challenge “religious discrimination” under the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.


the u.s. government has decided that I must now be stranded in war-torn Syria because I am muslim

do I have standing to challenge this under "religious discrimination?"


	More on this below, but it is worth noting that the court did not actually end up concluding that the Trump Administration had engaged in religious discrimination; it just found that it didn’t have enough time and evidence to justify reversing the district judge on that issue.


It was more like "due process is enough." Wierd they didn't do this though...


	A more considered appeal on this question would probably involve a more serious attempt to grapple with the extreme novelty of the argument that the Establishment Clause limits the scope of federal immigration law.


the "extreme novelty" that laws must follow the constitution


	...Third, the court rejected an unreasonably broad argument made by the Administration: that Executive Branch determinations in the immigration area are beyond the review of courts. This was not a defensible argument, and the fact that it was advanced at all seems to be a sign of the chaotic lawyering of this case, brought while the Administration still had neither an Attorney General nor a Solicitor General appointed by President Trump. Let that be a lesson about picking high-stakes court battles without bothering to get your legal team in place first.


if even he says this...


	...Fourth, the court found that the government was not likely to win its case – the standard on a preliminary injunction, before all the evidence has been heard – on whether the executive order gave adequate due process protections to “lawful permanent residents and non-immigrant visaholders” who were barred from the country, again ignoring the fact that the Administration has stopped enforcing the order against lawful permanent residents and the fact that the states were also looking to enforce the injunction on behalf of refugees and others who had yet to be granted visas.


the states were looking to argue on behalf of non-visaholders

they were also aruging on behalf of families spending years and all their savings to get a visa only to be sent back as soon as they got there...

but they were also arguing for non-visaholders, so less likely to win (???)


	...The court did, however, rely on the Court’s 2001 decision in Zadvydas v. Davis, a 5-4 opinion written by Justice Breyer, which held that people charged with being illegally in the U.S. have a right to due process to challenge that before being deported. But nothing in Zadvydas would extend rights to people denied entry, and the Ninth Circuit simply concluded that if its order was too broad, it was up to the White House to write a narrower one – an opportunity that I would seize upon swiftly, if I was advising President Trump:


dunno this case. True?

maybe red herring, iirc used that to argue non-citizens have due process rights, not specifically for one denied entry

seems politically charged if not explained right

Arpaio case explains pretty well I think...


	...Notably, not one of the cases the court cited involved a federal court in evaluating “evidence of purpose” of religious discrimination by a co-equal branch of the federal government, rather than a state or local government – much less evidence derived from statements on the campaign trail.


dunno if this is important or not

seems kindof specific, sketchy


	If Trump’s “Muslim ban” statements in December 2015 have permanently reduced powers that the Executive Branch would otherwise have had to exclude aliens from the country, the court should say that openly.


has trump permenently stopped himself from ever doing EO?

could obama have done the same EO and gotten away with it?

what would Trump have to do to do same EO and argue not a muslim ban?

like:

Trump has epihpany

goes on pilgramage to Mecca

converts to Islam and joins ACLU

deadly virus breaks out in exactly those 7 coutntires

travel ban

???


	...Sixth and last, the court rejected the government’s argument that a refugee ban was urgent, given the lack of any evidence submitted thus far in the case to support urgency. That’s a bit of a Catch-22, since any evidence of imminent national security threats is likely classified and not properly offered to judges and litigants without security clearance


Yet Trump's argument for the ban was that he has no idea what's going on


	...If the Trump Administration should learn one lesson from this debacle, it’s that courts won’t accept bluster in place of evidence from an administration with which the judges are disinclined to sympathize. The court reached some bad rulings, but as the saying goes, hard cases make bad law. The Administration should try to avoid letting its cases be so hard when they don’t need to be. But it should also be prepared for the fact that the courts are not likely to give it a fair shake.


they have nothing



------


was the 9th circuit wrong?

cite applying to LPRs as the strongest reason, main reason not to rescind TRO.

Admin for some reason tried to argue LPRs have no due process rights, even though they had a better argument--they never intended to block LPRs in the first place.

And Mohammad v. United States shows that you don't need stranding LPRs for a TRO--that court found stranding spouses, children of U.S. citizens in dangerous countries was enough.


Even still, since the wash v. Trump case took over every other case, it was applying to LPRs that ultimately screwed them over when peititioning for stay to TRO.

9th circuit argument was: well they applied it to them before, could apply it again, shifting statements.

then cited separating families as "viable due process claim"

and this does seem true

if you assume what 9th found, that admin was applying to LPRs then stopped only for court order, that is strongest case for TRO

still seems overbroad, like should have blocked only for returning residents, don't really get that.

But 9th circuit does explain that, like saying all the other problems, "viable" claims are reasons they didn't limit to limit proposed by admin. So for 9th decision, those were a factor too.