

statutes say, if I read right, people at POE facing deportation to where they would be in danger or presecuted need asylum hearing, CAT hearing

this implies due process rights (Accardi says this I think)

------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-PA-0014-0001.pdf

Asali v. DHS maybe not the best case for violation of refugee statues

petition argued violations of asylum hearing and CAT statute, but didn't give as strong a case that they would be in danger after deportation as Darweesh

problem with Darweesh is gov let them go, although this was after petition. Docrtine on mootness says this doesn't make moot if they stopped apparently due to litigation.


some news reports say they wanted to escape conflict:

https://whyy.org/articles/update-assali-family-reunited-with-syrian-relatives-at-jfk-after-trumps-order-deported-them/
	He said he’d like to return to Syria when the civil war there ends. He came to U.S. to escape conflict, and “for a better future. For better opportunities,” Matthew Assali said.


also for "a better future"


https://www.nbcphiladelphia.com/news/local/Assali-Family-Syria-Donald-Trump-Vote-Allentown-Immigration-Ban-Travel-Order-412238593.html
	Assali's two brothers, their wives and their two children initiated their immigration attempts in 2003 while living in Syria. In December 2016, they were approved to join Assali and her husband in Allentown after the couple bought and furnished a home for them.


tried to immigrate first in 2003, before start of civil war


	...They went on an 18-hour flight back to Doha and are currently in Damascus, according to the Assali family. One of Assali's relatives has heart problems and was given oxygen.


weren't deported back to Syria but start of leg to U.S., although couldn't stay there legally


	..."America is not America," Assali said. "Like ISIS now, they ask, 'Are you Christian? What do you believe?' And if they are not saying what they believe, they kick you out and they cut your head off. So America, same thing. They ask you are you Muslim? You've got to change your religion. Thank you." Trump Immigration Order Triggers Protests Across USTrump Immigration Order Triggers Protests Across US


worred about persecution from ISIS (kindof a given?)


http://philadelphia.cbslocal.com/2017/01/28/family-of-turned-away-syrian-immigrants-speaks-out/
	The family had been working since 2003 to escape religious persecution in their war-torn country. They have a furnished home waiting for them in Allentown.


says motive for 2003 immigration attempt was to escape religious persecution


https://www.gofundme.com/bringassalifamilyback
	When they started the process, Syria was not a war-torn country; they simply wanted to join their family.  However, as time went on, the danger of the Syrian war compelled them to do everything possible to leave the country and come to the US.


gofundme on their behalf says the first "simply wanted to join their family," later wanted to escape Syrian war.


no details of any religious persecution against them in their court docs


...


http://www.mcall.com/news/local/allentown/mc-allentown-syrians-react-to-trump-20170130-story.html

says Syrian government intervened on behalf of Christians

https://townhall.com/tipsheet/katiepavlich/2017/01/31/after-trump-executive-order-syrian-christians-sent-back-to-genocide-zone-n2279296
	In 2015, Secretary of State John Kerry officially declared ISIS is waging genocide against Christians, Yazidis and other minority religious groups in the Middle East and North Africa. Christians living in Libya, Syria and Iraq, three of the seven countries in the executive order, are at severe risk for extermination.


previous U.S. administratin said ISIS waging genocide against Christians


...


https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/trump-s-immigration-ban-meet-some-stranded-muslims-n714056
	But when the Orthodox Christian couple arrived in Philadelphia on Saturday and the authorities told them they had to go back to Syria, they were incredulous.

	"I said, 'Are you joking?'" Alshahaf told NBC News by phone from Damascus Monday.

	She was told they had two options: to get back on a plane to Damascus or spend the night in jail. 

	"I told him [the immigration official], 'We came with dignity from our country and we will return with dignity to our country. We didn’t do anything. We returned back and we didn’t want to stay." 


voluntarily withdrew admission?


https://www.upi.com/In-Lebanon-Syrian-lives-on-hold-after-US-refugee-ban/1311486474988/
	"They took them in a room, where they were not allowed to give us a phone call," Sarmad Assali, the deported brothers' sister-in-law, said in a phone interview. "They were denied an interpreter and an attorney and forced to sign papers they didn't understand, under the threat of being handcuffed, detained and not being allowed back in the U.S. for five years. They have dignity, so they signed and were sent back on a plane without even being allowed to touch their passports and documentation."

	...At the airport, the Assalis had been forced to sign the I-407 form, a record of abandonment of any legal residency status, but the family's attorney, Jonathan Grode, said the fact that they had been previously security cleared in the U.S. Embassy in Amman, Jordan, helped them to reinstate their visas.


signed away LPR status, but say they were "forced" to do it. To get back, helped that they were previously security cleared in U.S. Embassy.


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-PA-0014-0001.pdf

petition says CBP officers told Assalis could either go back to Syria or get arrested and not be allowed to re-enter for 5 years, but believed from conversation with CBO officers that if they left would be able to return in 90 days (maybe misinterpretation, actually talking about ban duration.)

"seeing no other option, the plaintiffs agreed to leave the U.S. immediately."

differs from Assali's wife's account, said given option of either jail or go back to syria, indignant, left.


https://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trumps-immigration-order-sparks-confusion-despair-at-airports-1485709114
	His daughter, Sarah, a medical student who was born in the U.S., said that their paperwork had been approved late last year and they had decided to wait to travel after celebrating Christmas in Damascus.


could have come earlier but stayed in Syria for Christmas

don't seem like they urgently feared religious persecution


https://www.npr.org/2017/01/29/512336566/syrian-family-forced-to-return-to-middle-east-after-arriving-in-philadelphia
	...MARTIN: I understand that your family's been working to bring your aunts, uncles and cousins over for 14 years now. Why did they want to leave?

	ASSALI: Well, my dad originally came, you know, for a better future, for his children, for his family, and he just wanted to bring his brothers and sisters over to have the same opportunities that he had to attend better schools, have, you know, more opportunities.


Assali in U.S. wanted to bring family over for more opportunities and better schools


As far as I can tell, didn't try to apply for asylum elsewhere, just went back to home in Syria. Sarah Assali also says they became hopeful after seeing court orders and protests against ban, though.


Asalis seem like not got example of wrongdoing in deporting without due process for asylum, CAT


------

Almursis maybe good example of why asylum statutes should be followed


https://www.nbcbayarea.com/news/local/Yemeni-Family-Stranded-by-Travel-Ban-Makes-New-Home-in-El-Sobrante-413784673.html
	Through an interpreter, Almurisi explained that back home in Yemen, he had a master's degree and practiced oral surgery. But as that country's civil war intensified, he decided it was time to get his family out.

	"I needed to protect me and my family," he said.

	He sold everything he owned, spent months getting a green card, then got on a flight to the U.S. with his wife and five children.

	When they got about four hours away from Washington, D.C., Trump's executive order was signed and went into effect. When their plane landed, the Almurisi family was ordered back on a plane and out of the country.

	"I was begging them to leave us here because of the war in Yemen," he said.


Aziz too? except nothing on that was in their petition


https://www.mercurynews.com/2017/02/13/yemeni-refugee-family-arrives-in-east-bay-after-trump-travel-ban-nightmare/
	...Wolozin said that settlement was key because officials had already canceled their visas, and it appeared they had Almurisi sign a form withdrawing his family’s application for admission, she said.


also a problem, withdrew admission