http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
	Feb 16 2017

	...ON THE TRAVEL BAN

	QUESTION: On the travel ban -- we could banter back and forth. On the travel ban would you accept that that was a good example of the smooth running of government...

	TRUMP: Yeah, I do. I do. Let me tell you about this government...

	QUESTION: Were there any mistakes...

	TRUMP: Wait. Wait. I know who you are. Just wait.

	Let me tell you about the travel ban. We had a very smooth rollout of the travel ban. But we had a bad court. Got a bad decision. We had a court that's been overturned. Again, may be wrong. But I think it's 80 percent of the time, a lot.

	We had a bad decision. We're going to keep going with that decision. We're going to put in a new executive order next week some time. But we had a bad decision.


Trump insists travel ban rollout "smooth," emphasizes that he is upset the ban was blocked in court


	That's the other thing that was wrong with the travel ban. You had Delta with a massive problem with their computer system at the airports. You had some people that were put out there, brought by very nice busses, and they were put out at various locations.


a tacit acknowledgement that the rollout wasn't "perfect?" seems to be blameshifting to the delta computer hack (which was done by who?)


	Despite that the only problem that we had is we had a bad court. We had a court that gave us what I consider to be, with great respect, a very bad decision. Very bad for the safety and security of our country. The rollout was perfect.


doubling down on "bad court"/"perfect rollout"


	Now, what I wanted to do was do the exact same executive order, but said one thing. I said this to my people. Give them a one-month period of time. But Gen. Kelly, now Sec. Kelly, said if you do that, all these people will come in and (inaudible) the bad ones.

	You do agree there are bad people out there, right? That not everybody that's like you. You have some bad people out there.

	Kelly said you can't do that. And he was right. As soon as he said it I said wow, never thought of it. I said how about one week? He said no good. You got to do it immediately because if you do it immediately they don't have time to come in.


timing:


24th:

Flynn interviewed

press reports Trump expected to sign travel ban the next day, the 25th (https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-immigration-exclusive/trump-expected-to-order-temporary-ban-on-refugees-idUSKBN1582XQ)

Trump also tweets "big day for NATIONAL SECURITY tomorrow"

25th:

skip 302, Yates gets readout


26th:

Yates calls McGahn





	Now nobody ever reports that. But that's why we did it quickly.

	Now, if I would've done it a month, everything would've been perfect. The problem is we would've wasted a lot of time, and maybe a lot of lives because a lot of bad people would've come into our country.

	Now in the meantime, we're vetting very, very strongly. Very, very strongly. But we need help. And we need help by getting that executive order passed.

	QUESTION: Just a brief follow-up. But if it's so urgent, why not introduce...

	TRUMP: Yes? Go ahead.


------

said some of this ealier on jan 28:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S0zp57zQuZM

says "totally" prepared for rollout, going "very nicely," and it's "not a muslim ban."



------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_13769
	According to CNN the executive order was developed primarily by White House officials (which the Los Angeles Times reported as including "major architect" Stephen Miller and Steve Bannon[70]) without input from the U.S. Department of Justice's Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) that is typically a part of the drafting process. This was disputed by White House officials.[71] The OLC usually reviews all executive orders with respect to form and legality before issuance. The White House under previous administrations, including the Obama administration, has bypassed or overruled the OLC on sensitive matters of national security


https://web.archive.org/web/20171110221010/http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-immigration-20170129-story.html


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/politics/donald-trump-travel-ban/index.html
	The Department of Homeland Security was left making a legal analysis on the order after Trump signed it. 

	...Friday night, DHS arrived at the legal interpretation that the executive order restrictions applying to seven countries -- Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Syria, Sudan and Yemen -- did not apply to people with lawful permanent residence, generally referred to as green card holders. 

	The White House overruled that guidance overnight, according to officials familiar with the rollout. That order came from the President's inner circle, led by Stephen Miller and Steve Bannon. Their decision held that, on a case by case basis, DHS could allow green card holders to enter the US.

	...Before the President issued the order, the White House did not seek the legal guidance of the Office of Legal Counsel, the Justice Department office that interprets the law for the executive branch, according to a source familiar with the process.

	White House officials disputed that Sunday morning, saying that OLC signed off and agency review was performed.

	...Separately, a person familiar with the matter said career officials in charge of enforcing the executive order were not fully briefed on the specifics until Friday. The officials were caught off guard by some of the specifics and raised questions about how to handle the new banned passengers on US-bound planes.


didn't bother to check to make sure the ban was legal before implementing

DHS reportedly did analysis after ban in effect, and when they find a problem administration overrules them anyway

so if it so urgent to get this ban out there, why not make sure it would pass courts?

could chalk up to idiocy on Trump's part

but harder to argue this for his advisors, and Trump claims he wanted to "wait a month" first and his advisors told him to do it quickly



------

https://www.politico.com/story/2017/01/trump-immigration-order-john-kelly-234435
	Along with confusion surrounding the order’s implementation, reports also trickled out over the weekend that top administration officials, among them Kelly and Defense Secretary James Mattis, had not been consulted in crafting the order and were not aware of it until shortly before it was signed last week. On Tuesday, Kelly pushed back against those reports, telling reporters that he “did know it was under development” and had seen at least two drafts of the order.


was reported that Kelly didn't know about the order until "shortly before it was signed," Kelly pushes back saying he knew it was under development


transcript (Jan 31):


https://www.dhs.gov/news/2017/01/31/transcript-media-availability-executive-order-secretry-kelly-and-dhs-leadership

Kelly: national security, football analogies, "Obama did it first," "not a muslim ban"

not full press conference?


press conference:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LxKJ0FEoFqY

11:26

Kelly: We did know the EO was coming. We had people people involved in the general drafting of it--you know--clearly this whole approach was part of what then candidate Trump talked about for a year or two so we knew all that was coming. As I said we had high level government lawyers from across the interagency to Homeland Security that were involved in the drafting of it so we knew it was coming--it wasn't a surprise it was coming--and then we implemented it.


15:43

reporter asks to clarify: did you know EO was coming?

Reporter: I just want to clarify what you said, that you knew the executive order was coming. Is that what you said? That you knew it was going to be signed on Friday? Because there have been some reports that the first time you found out about it was when you were on a plane and you were upset about it. Did you know it was coming?


Kelly: As I said we knew it was coming from like two years ago when Mr. Trump first started to run for president. Certainly didn't learn about it on an airplane. Again, knew it was coming, knew it was signed Friday morning.

...I took a trip down to Miami for a couple different reasons one of which was to visit the people on the front lines of this whole effort... in service 39 months... Admiral Kirk... very good friend Jeh Johnson...

...but no I didn't learn about it on an airplane.


Kelly seems careful with words, stalling in answer in the middle. Asked specifically about a report that he learned of EO on an airplane and was upset, says "didn't learn about it on an airplane." "Knew it was coming" seems to mean to him that he knew Trump was going to sign a muslim ban EO at some point.


16:49

Reporter: How much guidance were you about to give them specifically when it comes to green card holders or people with visas who were with the U.S. military because it seems like a lot of the problems that were encountered could be easily foreseeable.

Kelly: I think the, from my perspective again, people like me are expected--and not just because of my military background--we are the departments are the implementers of the policy obviously developed, you know, by the White House approved by the President in collaboration and sent down to the departments for execution, in this case Homeland Security. The EO to me--and again it was more or less a collaborative process, the EO to me is fairly clear--again when that came down I think I was in my sixth day on the job but I relied on people like the ones that are standing up here in the hundreds back at the headquarters to say okay we got it boss you know this looks good to us we're off to the races. And the really, I mean, I kept being asked about chaos at the ports of entry, and as I said to many many members of Congress in individual phone calls the only you know our officers who are at the counter so to speak the only chaos they saw was taking place in other parts of the airport. They knew what they were doing as foreign nationals presented themselves they know what to do they knew what to do with it. And as I say the only, the only I guess we had to step back and re-cock a little bit--Keven can address that, he already has--we had to step back and re-cock just a little bit based on the court order that we immediately implemented. So no I knew this was under development and I think we were in pretty good shape and how it was implemented by the workforce.


Kelly asked how much guidance he gave on details of EO, specifically the "easily foreseeable" problems with it that were shut down by court order. He doesn't answer the question directly, but basically says they saw the order and implemented it.


20:25

Reporter: Didn't homeland security have a specific operational plan in place prior to the executive order being signed? And secondly, when did you learn specifically that President Trump was signing the order?

Kelly: Well I guess I'd go back to--I knew he was going to sign an order about a year and a half or two years before he became the president-elect. From day one in terms of the inauguration finishing touches--I'd have to put it that way--we're being put on the executive order. As I say the high level folks in the government--attorneys as well--were part of that. People on my staff were generally involved. I guess probably Wednesday I think we learned--went--Tuesday Wednesday that would probably that it would probably be during the week that it would be signed out. As you could imagine copies go back and forth and they're tweaked right up to the last minute or you know adjusted right up to the last minute. I think probably Thursday we found out it was going to be signed the next day. Certainly if you really [smiles]--if you really want to know what was in the executive order just read the newspaper the day before and you'd find out. But uhh so it was done in that way and of course Kevin and his team the whole team knows it's coming, knows what certainly the President-elect and knows what direction the EO you know that draft EO was outlining so people like Kevin--you know I don't know nearly as much about this as he does in terms of how you actually execute right down at the counter level at the airports--but he was leaning forward on that, so when it was signed we executed. And the only--as Kevin I think you'd agree--the only adjustment that had to be made was when the court order came out and of course we reacted to that as fast as we could.


Kelly asked if DHS had a plan for the order prepared ahead of its signing, and also when specifically did he learn Trump was signing it. Kelly doesn't answer first question directly, but says there were last minute changes being made to the order, and people on his staff were "generally involved." Says "we found out the order was going to be signed the next day" "probably Thursday." He guesses "probably Wednesday" they learned the order would probably be signed that week.


23:51

Reporter: I don't want to beat a dead horse ...did you know the details of what was in the order outside of kindof open source media ...?


Kelly: I did know it was under development. I had an opportunity to look at at least two--as I recollect--drafts as it got closer to Friday. Again I don't exactly know other than some of my legal shop representatives were involved, I would imagine some, on the landing team, I would imagine some of them. But the point is it came to the department it was you know on a close hold basis meaning we didn't distribute it to everyone in the department only those people that needed it myself included my chief and the lawyers--so it was a back-and-forth process. I did talk to representing the White House, oh probably, certainly early in the week about where it was going how it was being developed. I commented that I had seen some of the initial drafts, umm, pretty busy week I didn't get involved in correcting grammar or reformatting the thing so I don't know if that answers it.


Kelly asked (among other things) if he learned details of the EO outside of open source media. Kelly remembers he saw two drafts of the EO "as it got closer to Friday." He talked to "representing the White House" early in the week about where the EO was going. Says he saw some initial drafts but wasn't involved in editing the EO.


25:40


Reporter: A clarification? You had no personal input or any sort of advance working with making these drafts? In other words, the draft is made, and then presented to you, and then [inaudible].

Kelly: Well, presented to me, I mean this is a staff, primarily a staff process right so the policy gurus and the White House are working with the interagency people, not a large number I wouldn't expect, of interagency people, I saw the draft because it's still in staffing and the people that worked in and around me were saying we got it boss this is, you know, this is kind of what we expected it to be. I did not look at it from the perspective of as I say correcting the grammar or saying "no we need to change these words or do this thing." People that know the immigration process infinitely better than I do--and that includes people with the interagency--were the ones that did the staff work and ultimately the President signed it then as you know in our government then that is now passed down to the relevant agency in this case Homeland Security and we executed. And has Kevin has indicated and I certainly would endorse the people on the front lines...


Kelly is asked if he had any input in making the drafts. He doesn't answer the question directly, but says staff, policy gurus and probably a small number of interagency people were working on the EO. Kelly says his staff showed him the draft but said "we got it boss this is kind of what we expected." Kelly says he did not look at the drafts to "change these words or do this thing."


According to Kelly, he and others were aware Trump was going to sign a Muslim ban EO for a long time. Kelly talked to a WH representative about the direction of the EO probably early in the week. He learned the EO would be signed on Tuesday or Wednesday (from media reports?), and was shown drafts of the EO "closer to Friday." There were last minute changes made to the EO. Kelly did not give direction as to the wording or content of the EO when he was shown the drafts. Kelly does not give a direct answer as to whether he gave any input or direction for the EO at an earlier time.


Trump says implementing the EO quickly was urgent and that he came to this conclusion after a conversation with General Kelly. Kelly says he learned the EO was going to be signed on Friday the day before and that he was not involved in the last minute changes made to the EO.

There is no direct or glaring contradiction between Trump's account and Kelly's. Trump was sworn in Friday the 20th, was making last minute changes to the EO sometime between then and Friday the 27th, and signed it on the 27th. The believability of this part of Trump's alibi depends on when this conversation took place. If Trump thought the Muslim ban was urgent before he was sworn in, why not have the order ready to go by then?

It is plausible that Trump was planning to have a one month delay, changed his mind due to a conversation with Kelly and made some rushed last-minute changes to the EO before finally implementing it on the 27th.

However, if Trump made rushed the EO and made this last minute changes due to the advice of Kelly, it is strange that Kelly was not more involved in the process of developing and implementing the EO, especially in the days leading up to its signing.


...


Trump's claim is this:

	Now, what I wanted to do was do the exact same executive order, but said one thing. I said this to my people. Give them a one-month period of time. But Gen. Kelly, now Sec. Kelly, said if you do that, all these people will come in and (inaudible) the bad ones.

	You do agree there are bad people out there, right? That not everybody that's like you. You have some bad people out there.

	Kelly said you can't do that. And he was right. As soon as he said it I said wow, never thought of it. I said how about one week? He said no good. You got to do it immediately because if you do it immediately they don't have time to come in.


If taken at its word this doesn't make sense with Kelly's account. Trump says he wanted to do the "exact same executive order" and wait a month, but the EO was undergoing last minute changes. A draft was leaked the 25th (no date on draft), and iirc final order was different. Trump could have meant the EO as it was in his head I guess.

Problem is if what Trump says is true, Kelly's interview is just weird. Trump says Kelly insisted that Trump had to sign the EO immediately. So why does Kelly dodge questions about his involvement with the EO? Why does he say DHS didn't learn the EO would be signed until the day before and why were they caught off-guard if he were the one who told Trump to sign it immediately? And if Kelly was adamant the EO had to be implemented immediately, why didn't he bring this up with Trump sooner, so that the EO could be ready and DHS and other agencies prepared?


so basically: Kelly's account doesn't directly contradict Trump. But if you take them both at their word, things don't add up.


also notable that Kelly says some lawyers, small group of interagency, and some DHS staff were involved in drafting the order. Also says the order was on "close hold basis" so not everyone got to look at it beforehand. So ostensibly Trump had people working on it that could have made sure it would have passed courts, but for whatever reason they didn't.


...


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/politics/donald-trump-travel-ban/index.html	
	It wasn't until Friday -- the day Trump signed the order banning travel from seven Muslim-majority countries for 90 days and suspending all refugee admission for 120 days -- that career homeland security staff were allowed to see the final details of the order, a person familiar with the matter said. 

	...The policy team at the White House developed the executive order on refugees and visas, and largely avoided the traditional interagency process that would have allowed the Justice Department and homeland security agencies to provide operational guidance, according to numerous officials who spoke to CNN on Saturday.


maybe not compatible with what Kelly says? some interagency and DHS staff involved.



------


https://www.wsj.com/articles/white-house-defends-executive-order-barring-travelers-from-certain-muslim-countries-1485642323
	Explaining the new travel policies, the administration officials said they had been working on it during the transition period, believing the nation couldn't afford a delay.

	“To ensure that the risk is at least being minimized while new screening and vetting standards are established, it is only common-sensical to limit admissions from among some of the most high risk territories in the world identified by Congress,” the senior official said.

	“Everybody who needed to know was informed,” the official added. 

a senior official says the Trump admin was working on the EO during the transition period because it couldn't wait. If this is true, would imply Trump's supposed conversation with Kelly happened before he was sworn in. If true, what is Trump's alibi then? I guess could say developing the EO took awhile and they were pressed for time. Looks like one of those things where they are either incredibly stupid/incompetent or criminal.

For the most part, allegations of stupidity against Trump are credible, though thats not always true for his staff.

Official also everyone who "needed to know" was informed


------


when Kelly talks about "the court order," what specifically is he referring to?

legal challenges to ban has it's own wiki page: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_challenges_to_the_Trump_travel_ban


I guess this?


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/28/us/refugees-detained-at-us-airports-prompting-legal-challenges-to-trumps-immigration-order.html
	WASHINGTON — A federal judge in Brooklyn came to the aid of scores of refugees and others who were trapped at airports across the United States on Saturday after an executive order signed by President Trump, which sought to keep many foreigners from entering the country, led to chaotic scenes across the globe.

	The judge’s ruling blocked part of the president’s actions, preventing the government from deporting some arrivals who found themselves ensnared by the presidential order. But it stopped short of letting them into the country or issuing a broader ruling on the constitutionality of Mr. Trump’s actions.


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/29/politics/ny-immigration-order-stay/index.html
	(CNN)The US Department of Homeland Security said on Sunday it will comply with judicial orders not to deport detained travelers affected by President Donald Trump's seismic move to ban more than 130 million people from entering the United States.

	A federal judge in New York temporarily blocked the order Saturday night for citizens of seven Muslim-majority countries who have already arrived in the US and those who are in transit, and who hold valid visas, ruling they cannot be removed from the US.


------


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/31/us/trump-travel-ban-lawsuit-settlement.html
	The initial imposition of the ban was widely viewed as a political debacle for the young administration. John F. Kelly, who was secretary of Homeland Security at the time and is now the White House chief of staff, confirmed that he had not seen the final order until after the president signed it. The White House had not asked the department for a legal review. Some border control officials arrived at work the following morning still unsure how to interpret the president’s order.


doesn't sound right--OLC did review, and Kelly at least saw a draft shortly before it was signed


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/31/us/politics/trump-ban-immigrants-refugees.html
	John F. Kelly, the secretary of homeland security, said that Mr. Trump’s order did not amount to a “travel ban,” adding, “This is a temporary pause that allows us to better review the existing refugee and visa vetting system.”

	But Mr. Kelly also confirmed that, while he saw versions of the executive order, he did not see the final order before it was signed by the president.

	He said that executives at homeland security were involved in writing the order, but added that the knowledge of it and its distribution was limited. Mr. Kelly said that he had known that the order was coming for some time, but that he was not involved personally in the process to the degree to which he “corrected grammar or say we needed to change things.”


summary of his press conference, seems right


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/29/us/politics/donald-trump-rush-immigration-order-chaos.html
	WASHINGTON — As President Trump signed a sweeping executive order on Friday, shutting the borders to refugees and others from seven largely Muslim countries, the secretary of homeland security was on a White House conference call getting his first full briefing on the global shift in policy.

	Gen. John F. Kelly, the secretary of homeland security, had dialed in from a Coast Guard plane as he headed back to Washington from Miami. Along with other top officials, he needed guidance from the White House, which had not asked his department for a legal review of the order.


This doesn't sound right--didn't DHS review the order and find problems? could be they didn't ask but DHS reviewed anyway.


	...In the months that followed, Mr. Trump’s campaign tried to back away from the proposal, which was seen by Democrats as over-the-top campaign rhetoric that would never be reality. Mr. Trump offered few details as the campaign progressed, and as president-elect he promised to protect the country from terrorists with only vague promises of “extreme vetting.”


Is this true? if Trump backed away from it then suddenly switched to implementing it in the worst way possible that's suspicious


	...One reason, he said, is that when the Trump transition team asked pointed questions suggesting new policies to the career officials, those questions were swiftly leaked to the news media, generating negative stories. So the Trump team began to limit the information they discussed with officials from the previous administration.

	“Why share it with them?” Mr. Carafano said.

	R. Gil Kerlikowske, who served as commissioner of Customs and Border Protection under former President Barack Obama, said that his staff had little communication with Mr. Trump’s transition team, who made no mention of a bar on entry for people from certain countries.


interesting--an alibi as to why Yates wasn't informed?


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	CORNYN: Did you (ph) -- what -- what is your authority to -- to overrule the Office of Legal Counsel when it comes to a legal determination?

	YATES: The Office of Legal Counsel has a narrow function, and that is to look at the face of an executive order and to determine purely on its face whether there is some set of circumstances under which at least some part of the executive order may be lawful. And importantly, they do not look beyond the face of the executive order, for example, statement that are made contemporaneously or prior to the execution of the E.O. that may bear on its intent and purpose.

	That office does not look at those factors, and in determining the constitutionality of this executive order, that was an important analysis to engage in and one that I did.


Yates says OLC reviewed (when?), but don't look out external circumstances, particularly statements by President. Yates looked at intent of order, derived from analysis of "facts outside the face of the order" which was part of what led to conclusion it was unlawful.

	
	...YATES: But my concern was not an INA concern here. It, rather, was a constitutional concern, whether or not this -- the executive order here violated the Constitution, specifically with the establishment clause and equal protection and due process.


Yates founder order unconstitutional, violating establishment clause, equal protection and due process.


	CRUZ: There is no doubt the arguments you laid out are arguments that we could expect litigants to bring, partisan litigants who disagree with the policy decision of the president.

	I would note, on January 27th, 2017, the Department of Justice issued an official legal decision, a determination by the Office of Legal Counsel, that the executive order -- and I'll quote from the opinion -- "the proposed order is approved with respect to form and legality."v

	That's a determination from OLC on January 27th that it was legal. Three days later, you determined, using your own words, that although OLC had -- had opined on legality, it had not addressed whether it was, quote, "wise or just."

	YATES: And I also, in that same directive, Senator, said that I was not convinced it was lawful. I also made the point that the office of -- OLC looks purely at the face of the document and, again, makes a determination as to whether there is some set of circumstances under which some portion of that E.O. would be enforceable, would be lawful.

	They, importantly, do not look outside the face of the document. And in this particular instance, particularly where we were talking about a fundamental issue of religious freedom -- not the interpretation of some arcane statute, but religious freedom -- it was appropriate for us to look at the intent behind the president's actions, and the intent is laid in and out his statements.


OLC did legal review and decided lawful, Yates looked at intent of the EO laid out in Trump's statements


	CRUZ: A final, very -- very brief question. In the over 200 years of the Department of Justice history, are you aware of any instance in which the Department of Justice has formally approved the legality of a policy, and three days later, the attorney general has directed the department not to follow that policy, and to defy that policy?

	YATES: I'm not. But I'm also not aware of a situation where the Office of Legal Counsel was advised not to tell the attorney general about it until after it was over.

	CRUZ: Thank you, Ms. Yates. I -- I -- I would note, that might be the case, if there's reason to suspect partisanship.


OLC was advised not to tell Yates about the EO, Cruz alleges this was because of a suspicion of partisanship.


------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	KLOBUCHAR: And during that meeting did they mention -- anyone mention that this refugee order was about to come out?

	YATES: No.

	KLOBUCHAR: Did the acting Attorney General of the United States?

	YATES: No and that was one thing that was of concern to us, is that not only was department leadership not consulted here and beyond department leadership, really the subject matter experts, the national security experts, not only was the department not consulted, we weren't even told about it. I learned about this from media reports.


Yates, DOJ leadership, experts not consulted or told about the EO


	...KLOBUCHAR: And then moving forward here, as was mentioned by Senator Durbin, this order was (inaudible) after a lawsuit from the State of Washington and Minnesota, the court basically challenged -- the constitutionality of the order. The order is now taken effect, but what I want to get to right now is the fact that the administration then withdrew its request for an appeal of the court ruling blocking implementation of the same order and then they changed the order that you would not implement.

	YATES: Right. And there were a number of important distinctions between travel ban one and travel ban two. At the time I had to make my decision for example, the executive order still applied to green card holders, lawful permanent residents and those who had visas.

	There were a number of other distinctions as well. And look, let me say ...

	KLOBUCHAR: Thank you.


Courts found order unconstitutional, Trump admin withdrew appeal then changed order. Yates says there were important distinctions between old and new order: order 1 applied to green card holders, lawful perminent residents, those with visas. Other distinctions.

Yates saws she gets that good people could disagree with decision but she followed the law and did her job.


	...KENNEDY: Did you believe, then, that there were reasonable arguments that could be made in its defense?

	YATES: I believed that any argument that we would have to make in its defense would not be grounded in the truth, because, to make an argument in its defense, we would have to argue that the executive order had nothing to do with religion, that it was not done with an intent to discriminate against Muslims. And based on a variety of factors...


Yates says she'd have to lie to defend EO and say there was no intent to discriminate against Muslims.


	...YATES: I think the issue that we faced at the Department of Justice is to defend this executive order would require lawyers to go in and argue that this has nothing to do with religion, something that...


they couldn't argue that the order has nothing to do with religion

Kennedy cuts her off when she says something about "timing," keeps pressing metaphysical question of when does an EO become unconstitutional (who appointed you to the supreme court?)


The second part with Kennedy: Yates basically saying the same thing, "I'm not the President's law firm." Her job is to uphold law of the land and not always try to make legal arguments to defend President, especially untruthful ones.


	...BLUMENTHAL: Thanks, Mr. Chairman.

	Ms. Yates, so far, the concerns you expressed about the constitutionality of these executive orders have been upheld by the courts, correct?

	YATES: That's right.


Courts found same thing Yates found, then order withdrawn.

Basically Trump made an EO that DOJ and courts couldn't defend. It's either lie against your own constitution or go against the President.

Experts and DOJ not consulted and concerns of legality of a Muslim ban had already been raised (media reports, Trump asking Gulianni about it). If Trump truly believed the order was an urgent matter of national security, why did he do so little to make sure he got it right the first time? Or even appear to sabotage his own chances of getting it past DOJ and the courts?

Seems like the only explanation of this that could be honest is sheer stupidity.

Congress and media also raised possibility that Trump didn't tell DOJ and other officials because he suspected partisanship, but that doesn't hold up either: would have to work with them either way.

Leaves question of whether Trump fired Yates because order was so urgent for national security or for other reasons. And even if he did fire her because he believed she was hurting national security with her ruling, is that legal?

The EO alone maybe an impeachable offense, especially if not done for national security. Caused chaos, violated rights of lawful residents, irresponsible. I guess would be abuse of power.

------

What is Trump's alibi?

Sounds like:

Trump believes terrorist coming in from Muslim countries are a dire threat, and so wants to ban Muslim immigration. At first he thought he could have a one month delay before implementing the ban, but a conversation with Kelly at some point convinced him he had to do the ban immediately. A week into his administration, after some last minute changes, Trump signs the EO banning travel from 7 Muslim-majority countries. He doesn't tell the DOJ or experts because he suspects they are partisan. The ban is immediately blocked by courts, and Trump withdraws his appeal and signs a "watered down," politically correct version of the ban a month later (March 6th).


One alibi: Trump is so convinced that the ban is urgent that he doesn't even want to risk telling the partisan "Obama holdovers." He figures if he puts the ban out there without telling them, they will be pressured to go with it ("better to ask for forgiveness than permission").

Doesn't work since the travel ban was done sloppily and caused chaos

I guess could say he screwed up that part because it was just so urgent? or just act like an idiot as usual

Trump's whole reasoning for the timing doesn't make sense. Saying he can't give them advance warning about the ban because they might try to come in, but he gave them advance warning during the campaign...

the idiot defense probably works better for him. Can see that in his statement ("the rollout was perfect")


------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_13769
	Trump's stated reason for issuing the executive order was to prevent terrorism.[134] An internal report compiled by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Intelligence and Analysis Unit, however, concluded that people from the seven nations affected by the travel ban pose no increased terror risk.[135] The report found that "country of citizenship is unlikely to be a reliable indicator of potential terrorist activity" and that few individuals from the seven affected countries access the U.S. in any case, since the State Department grants a small number of visas to citizens of those countries."[134][135] The report found that of 82 people determined to have inspired by a foreign terrorist organization "to carry out or try to carry out an attack in the United States, just over half were U.S. citizens born in the United States," while the rest came from a group of 26 countries, only two of which were among the seven nations included in the ban.[134] White House and DHS officials downplayed the significance of the report, saying it was only a draft.


Unreasonable to suspect banning travel from these countries would actually reduce terrorism. iirc Trump's argument was terrorism was somehow inherent to Islam (during campaign). But Gulianni said they based their own analysis on which countries have the most "danger," although only 2 of the countries were the source of terrorists and 26 countries overall had terrorists that traveled to the U.S.

basically would have to argue he did his own stupid analysis.

Gulianni basically spells it out, he tried to find a way to "do a Muslim ban, but legally."


------

https://www.usnews.com/news/national-news/articles/2017-06-12/donald-trumps-statements-on-twitter-cited-in-courts-decision-to-upholds-block-on-travel-ban

court rules for revised travel ban that is unconstitutional based on Trump's public statements.


What were Trump's public statements leading up to original ban?

https://www.nytimes.com/politics/first-draft/2015/12/07/donald-trump-calls-for-banning-muslims-from-entering-u-s/
	Saying that “hatred” among many Muslims for Americans is “beyond comprehension,” Mr. Trump said in a statement that the United States needed to confront “where this hatred comes from and why.”

	“Until we are able to determine and understand this problem and the dangerous threat it poses, our country cannot be the victims of horrendous attacks by people that believe only in jihad, and have no sense of reason or respect for human life,” Mr. Trump said.

	...At a rally at the U.S.S. Yorktown in South Carolina on Monday night, Mr. Trump drew sustained cheers from the audience as he outlined his idea for the ban.

	“We have no choice,” Mr. Trump said. “Our country cannot be the victim of tremendous attacks by people who believe only in jihad.”


equating Islam and terrorism?


https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/public-safety/presidents-trump-revised-travel-ban-faces-new-legal-challenges/2017/05/08/c4c6f968-3387-11e7-b373-418f6849a004_story.html
	Several judges also asked whether a Trump campaign statement calling for a “total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States” was still on his website. 



https://web.archive.org/web/20170127090508/https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/donald-j.-trump-statement-on-preventing-muslim-immigration
	​Donald J. Trump Statement on Preventing Muslim Immigration

	(New York, NY) December 7th, 2015, -- Donald J. Trump is calling for a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country's representatives can figure out what is going on.


http://fortune.com/2016/11/10/donald-trump-muslim-ban-statement/
	Perhaps the most defining, and controversial, element of Trump’s campaign was when he called for “a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States.” Removing this statement from his website had some speculating that perhaps he was backing away from that plan. Considering it is back up in full, that does not appear to be the case.


http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/full-text-donald-trumps-2016-republican-national-convention/story?id=40786529
	Once again, France is the victim of brutal Islamic terrorism. Men, women and children, viciously mowed down. Lives ruined. Families ripped apart. A nation in mourning. The damage and devastation that can be inflicted by Islamic radicals, has been proven over and over. 

	...Lastly, and very importantly we must immediately suspend immigration from any nation that has been compromised by terrorism until such time as proven vetting mechanisms have been put in place. We don't want them in our country. 


in RNC speech, doesn't call for Muslim ban specifically, but rails against "radical Islamic terrorism" and says it's very important to "suspend immigration" from nations "compromised by terrorism" "immediately." Appears to be referring to campaign promise for Muslim ban ("extreme vetting").


Was he working on EO before inaugaration? An anonymous official says so, and Trump here says it was important to do "immediately." This undermines his own argument that "bad dudes" shouldn't be given "notice," or his story that general Kelly told him you have to do it immediately (unless that conversation happened before this speech).


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/01/29/trump-asked-for-a-muslim-ban-giuliani-says-and-ordered-a-commission-to-do-it-legally/
	Trump signed orders on Friday not only to suspend admission of all refugees into the United States for 120 days but also to implement “new vetting measures” to screen out “radical Islamic terrorists.” Refugee entry from Syria, however, would be suspended indefinitely, and all travel from Syria and six other nations — Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen — is suspended for 90 days. Trump also said he would give priority to Christian refugees over those of other religions, according to the Christian Broadcasting Network.

	Fox News host Jeanine Pirro asked Giuliani whether the ban had anything to do with religion.

	“How did the president decide the seven countries?” she asked. “Okay, talk to me.”

	“I'll tell you the whole history of it,” Giuliani responded eagerly. “So when [Trump] first announced it, he said, 'Muslim ban.' He called me up. He said, 'Put a commission together. Show me the right way to do it legally.' "


https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/civil-rights-groups-fight-trump-s-refugee-ban-uncertainty-continues-n713811
	 President Donald Trump defended his controversial executive order restricting travel from seven Muslim-majority nations and indefinitely banning Syrian refugees as "not about religion" amid a second day of protests and uncertainty around the ban.

	"This is not about religion," Trump said in the statement issued Sunday evening. "This is about terror and keeping our country safe. There are over 40 different countries worldwide that are majority Muslim that are not affected by this order."


Trump says Muslims must be banned from entering "until we can figure out what's going on," but that his EO was not a Muslim ban since there are 33 other countries with a Muslim majority that were not affected by the order.


    ...There is nothing nice about searching for terrorists before they can enter our country. This was a big part of my campaign. Study the world!
    — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 30, 2017

    If the ban were announced with a one week notice, the "bad" would rush into our country during that week. A lot of bad "dudes" out there!

Says it was a "big part" of his campaign, and if the the ban was announced with a one week notice, "bad dudes" would rush into the country during that week.

What is he trying to say? He could wait a year and not announce the ban until the day before he signed it. He already announced the ban during his campaign, and screwing up the initial EO gave them a month of "notice" anyway.

Probably he'd say he was worried about leaks giving the "bad dudes" notice. If operating under these assumptions, would have had to write the EO as quickly as possible before implementing. After the ban was leaked on the 25th, Trump would have an excuse for implementing the ban as quickly as possible. When did Trump himself announce the ban?

Being concerned about leaks could also be his alibi for not informing Yates and other officials.

After the ban was leaked, why couldn't Trump consult Yates then?

And if he really could create the ban so quickly, strange he took a month for the second one (could argue being careful that time).


------

https://twitter.com/search?f=tweets&vertical=default&q=from%3ArealDonaldTrump%20since%3A2017-01-23%20until%3A2017-02-06&src=typd&lang=en

Trump's tweets around the time of the ban


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tEpWYRroaLE&app=desktop

speech at DHS on 25th alludes to ban around 15:00, but he doesn't announce it there

------

http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/transcript-abc-news-anchor-david-muir-interviews-president/story?id=45047602

Trump announces Muslim ban (not first time?) on David Muir interview Jan 25

	DAVID MUIR: Mr. President, I wanna ask you about refugees. You're about to sign a sweeping executive action to suspend immigration to this country.

	PRESIDENT TRUMP: Right.

	DAVID MUIR: Who are we talking about? Is this the Muslim ban?

	PRESIDENT TRUMP: We're talking about -- no it's not the Muslim ban. But it's countries that have tremendous terror. It's countries that we're going to be spelling out in a little while in the same speech. And it's countries that people are going to come in and cause us tremendous problems. Our country has enough problems without allowing people to come in who, in many cases or in some cases, are looking to do tremendous destruction. 


Trump denies it is a Muslim ban


	
	DAVID MUIR: Let me ask you about some of the countries that won't be on the list, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia. Why are we going to allow people to come into this country ...

	PRESIDENT TRUMP: You're going to see -- you're going to see. We're going to have extreme vetting in all cases. And I mean extreme. And we're not letting people in if we think there's even a little chance of some problem. 

	DAVID MUIR: Are you at all ...

	(OVERTALK)

	PRESIDENT TRUMP: We are excluding certain countries. But for other countries we're gonna have extreme vetting. It's going to be very hard to come in. Right now it's very easy to come in. It's gonna be very, very hard. I don't want terror in this country. You look at what happened in San Bernardino. You look at what happened all over. You look at what happened in the World Trade Center. Okay, I mean, take that as an example.

	DAVID MUIR: Are you at all ...

	(OVERTALK)

	DAVID MUIR: ... concerned -- are you at all concerned it's going to cause more anger among Muslims ...

	PRESIDENT TRUMP: Anger?

	DAVID MUIR: ... the world?

	PRESIDENT TRUMP: There's plenty of anger right now. How can you have more?

	DAVID MUIR: You don't think it'll ...

	PRESIDENT TRUMP: Look, David ...

	DAVID MUIR: ... exacerbate the problem?

	PRESIDENT TRUMP: ... David, I mean, I know you're a sophisticated guy. The world is a mess. The world is as angry as it gets. What? You think this is gonna cause a little more anger? The world is an angry place. All of this has happened. We went into Iraq. We shouldn't have gone into Iraq. We shouldn't have gotten out the way we got out.

	The world is a total mess. Take a look at what's happening with Aleppo. Take a look what's happening in Mosul. Take a look what's going on in the Middle East. And people are fleeing and they're going into Europe and all over the place. The world is a mess, David. 


Trump can't explain why countries like Afghanistan are still on the list, and doesn't seem to mind that the ban will cause more anger among Muslims. Hard to argue how it does anything to help national security.


------

text of EO:

https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/executive-order-protecting-nation-foreign-terrorist-entry-united-states/
	In order to protect Americans, the United States must ensure that those admitted to this country do not bear hostile attitudes toward it and its founding principles. The United States cannot, and should not, admit those who do not support the Constitution, or those who would place violent ideologies over American law. In addition, the United States should not admit those who engage in acts of bigotry or hatred (including “honor” killings, other forms of violence against women, or the persecution of those who practice religions different from their own) or those who would oppress Americans of any race, gender, or sexual orientation.


referring to his statements during the campaign about Muslims?


	...I hereby suspend entry into the United States, as immigrants and nonimmigrants, of such persons for 90 days from the date of this order (excluding those foreign nationals traveling on diplomatic visas, North Atlantic Treaty Organization visas, C-2 visas for travel to the United Nations, and G-1, G-2, G-3, and G-4 visas).


broadly suspends travel of foreign nationals except a few types of visas

	...Upon the resumption of USRAP admissions, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security, is further directed to make changes, to the extent permitted by law, to prioritize refugee claims made by individuals on the basis of religious-based persecution, provided that the religion of the individual is a minority religion in the individual’s country of nationality. Where necessary and appropriate, the Secretaries of State and Homeland Security shall recommend legislation to the President that would assist with such prioritization.


referring to his statements about prioritizing Christian refugees? I mean there are only so many persecuted religious minorities in these countries...


	...DONALD J. TRUMP

------

http://www.cnn.com/2017/05/08/politics/4th-circuit-court-of-appeals-travel-ban-hearing/index.html
	"There's a logical problem with the order," Jadwat said, noting the countries selected by Trump are "not the list of countries you come up" with when outlining those that pose the biggest threats to the United States.


courts also saying order doesn't make logical sense for "national security" purpose.

and couldn't they just go to Canada or Mexico first...


------

http://www.cnn.com/2017/05/08/politics/4th-circuit-court-of-appeals-travel-ban-hearing/index.html
	The original executive order was swiftly blocked nationwide by a federal judge in Seattle, the 9th US Circuit Court of Appeals refused to reinstate it, and then the administration spent over a month rewriting it, exempting several categories of foreign travelers and taking care to make no express mention of religion -- all in the hopes of avoiding legal scrutiny for a second time around.


spent a month re-writing the second ban--why? Doesn't act like it was urgent.



------

USA Today

What President Trump has said about the travel ban

Dec 8 Trump trying to argue Muslim ban not unconstitutional, shows aware of legal problem with Muslim ban

July 24 basically saying he's doing the "focus on territories" thing to get around people "upset he used the word 'Muslim'". Confirms what Kelly said, that the EO is the Muslim ban.

Oct 9 Again confirming the EO is the Muslim ban

Dec 22: implying he still plans a Muslim ban?

Jan 27 "we all know what that means" a wink and nudge that it's actually a Muslim ban?


------

also doesn't make sense about travel ban:

it's temporary, gives 90 days to "figure out what's going on." But the revised travel ban was nearly that long after Trump took office. Didn't they have enough time to figure out "what was going on" by then?

should double check what it actually does

first and second ban both had the 90 days thing

in first ban syria refugees banned indefinitely, in second for 120 days

later Trump did proclimation to add DPRK and Venezuela to the 2nd ban, others, and the court case against it was dropped.


------

Jan 25 Julie Herschild Davis article on travel ban and another EO makes it sound reasonable. Wasn't the draft leaked by then?

"The order on refugees is in line with a Muslim ban that Mr. Trump proposed during the campaign, though it does not single out any particular religion."

iirc article also says the David Muir interview was the first time Trump acknowledged the travel ban


------

AP Exclusive: DHS report disputes threat from banned nations

Brietbart cites this as some kind of plot, also says the document was pointed to in court arguments.


------

FBI, others also say many terrorists just come in from Canada.


------


order was a Muslim ban but Trump tried to word it in a way that made it plausibly deniable it wasn't (e.g. never using word "Muslim" but describing negative stereotypes of Muslims)

other examples of this in authoritarian regimes? e.g. Russian universities giving out special tests to Jews so they wouldn't pass

generally examples of government clearly trying to do one horrible thing but word it in a way so they can claim they were doing something else


https://arxiv.org/abs/1110.1556
	This is a special collection of problems that were given to select applicants during oral entrance exams to the math department of Moscow State University. These problems were designed to prevent Jews and other undesirables from getting a passing grade. Among problems that were used by the department to blackball unwanted candidate students, these problems are distinguished by having a simple solution that is difficult to find. Using problems with a simple solution protected the administration from extra complaints and appeals. This collection therefore has mathematical as well as historical value. 


this is kindof similar--can claim the applicants just failed the exam when really they were trying to stop certain classes of people from entry



------


how did trump screw over travel ban?

put in language that made clear it was a muslim ban in combination with his public statements

implemented chaotically in such a way that people would be stuck, inconveinced and screwed over and immediately bring litigation (which is how injunction brought about)



------


http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/timeline-trumps-battle-courts-travel-ban-alive/story?id=50559798
	There was some back-and-forth in the courts about how the case would proceed -- until the Trump administration voluntarily withdrew after signing a new travel ban.

	This second ban was limited to six Muslim-majority countries, taking Iraq off the list. It also exempted legal permanent residents and anyone who already had a valid visa, which the original didn't do. And it excised the permanent ban on Syrian refugees but kept in place the 120-day suspension of all refugee admissions.


why couldn't this be in the first ban? does Trump argue lawful permanent residents should be barred from travel to the U.S.?


	Two days after its unveiling, another state -- this time, Hawaii -- sued to bar its implementation, arguing that the executive order "began life as a Muslim ban," was "infected with the same legal problems as the first order —- undermining bedrock constitutional and statutory guarantees," and was "motivated by animus and a desire to discriminate on the basis of religion and/or national origin, nationality, or alienage." 



June 26 limited travel ban goes into effect (is this the first time?)


------


Did Trump know his travel ban would be blocked by courts? did he make an effort to find out?

Kelly says some lawyers were involved in developing the ban

Some news outlets say OLC not involved in drafting, but Yates says the did make a decision on it the 27th


here is OLC statement: http://i2.cdn.turner.com/cnn/2017/images/02/02/eo.foreign.terrorist.entry.pdf


all they say is "approved in form and legality"

when did they review? the same day? don't get it


can show that Trump did not make an honest effort to make sure the ban would pass courts and be defended by DOJ



can show that Trump knew the ban being found a "Muslim ban" would cause legal problems for him, commented on constitutionality before, made public statements that "it's not a Muslim ban"


https://factba.se/search#muslim%2Bban
	"...The Muslim ban is something that in some form has morphed into a extreme vetting from certain areas of the world. Hillary Clinton wants to allow hundreds of thousands -- excuse me. Excuse me....."





------


there was confusion about whether ban applies to lawful permanent residents. I think this is what led to litigation against ban?


https://www.lawfareblog.com/olc-memo-refugee-executive-order


McGahn wrote a memo to state dep claryfying that it does not apply to lawful permanent residents 3 days later



------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2017/01/30/trump-says-all-is-going-well-on-immigration-order-amid-questions-and-confusion/?utm_term=.3d4b3f0b1253
	The Senate Judiciary Committee is scheduled to vote Tuesday on President Trump’s pick for attorney general, Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.), whose views align much more closely with the president’s.


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/30/politics/donald-trump-immigration-order-department-of-justice/index.html
	Yates' decision was always likely to be extremely short-lived as Sessions is scheduled for a vote in the Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday.



couldn't he just wait for Sessions instead of firing Yates?


	...Currently, there are cases filed in at least five states including Virginia, New York, Massachusetts, Washington and California that are challenging Trump's order.

	The decision effectively grounds the executive order for the next few days until Sessions is sworn in.


If he's arguing the ban an urgent matter of national security, then no



what does it mean if the DOJ doesn't defend Trump's travel ban? does he have to get a law firm to do it for him? can OLC still do it?



https://www.wsj.com/articles/acting-attorney-general-orders-justice-dept-not-to-defend-trumps-travel-ban-1485819447
	Ms. Yates’s decision is based on the series of lawsuits that were filed in the first 24 hours in which immigration officials began enforcing Mr. Trump’s order on refugees and immigrants. Civil rights and immigrant advocates sued on behalf of individuals affected by the decision, particularly legal permanent residents who suddenly found themselves in limbo at U.S. airports when the order went into effect.

	Because of those lawsuits, Justice Department lawyers have begun appearing in court to defend the legality of the order, meaning that Ms. Yates ended up overseeing, albeit temporarily, the legal position of the Trump administration.


Trump set himself up for that. Basically Trump would have needed DOJ to defend all the legal problems the ban created but instead put it out in a way that made it impossible to defend without lying.


	...Firing Ms. Yates could create a new problem for the Trump White House—as a Senate-confirmed official, she is the only person in the current Justice Department who can approve applications to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, which oversees the most sensitive national security cases involving terrorism and espionage.


interesting--firing Yates not so great for national security for Trump administration.



------


Trump public statements in relation to passages in EO:



https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/executive-order-protecting-nation-foreign-terrorist-entry-united-states/
	In order to protect Americans, the United States must ensure that those admitted to this country do not bear hostile attitudes toward it and its founding principles. The United States cannot, and should not, admit those who do not support the Constitution, or those who would place violent ideologies over American law. In addition, the United States should not admit those who engage in acts of bigotry or hatred (including “honor” killings, other forms of violence against women, or the persecution of those who practice religions different from their own) or those who would oppress Americans of any race, gender, or sexual orientation.




https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NeT6aJ4MH2E&t=8m30s
	This isn't only a matter of terrorism, but also a matter of quality of life. We want to make sure that we're only admitting those into our country who support our values and love--and I mean love--our people. ...Pew polling shows that in many of the countries from which we draw large numbers of immigrants extreme views about religion are commonplace. For instance, according to Pew a majority in Afghanistan and Pakistan say honor killings of women are often or sometimes justified. A majority in these countries also support the death penalty for those who leave the faith. We've admitted tens of thousands from these countries in the last few years with no effective screening plan in place. We have no--we have no idea who we're letting in. We have no idea. You see what's happening. In fact Hillary Clinton as Secretary of State admitted multiple refugees who were lated charged with terrorism related activities ..Hillary Clinton won't even say the words "radical Islamic terrorism."



https://web.archive.org/web/20170114161841/https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/donald-j.-trump-address-on-immigration
	Another reform involves new screening tests for all applicants that include an ideological certification to make sure that those we are admitting to our country share our values and love our people.

	For instance, in the last five years, we’ve admitted nearly 100,000 immigrants from Iraq and Afghanistan – in these two countries, according to Pew research, a majority of residents say that the barbaric practice of honor killings against women are often or sometimes justified.

	Applicants will be asked for their views about honor killings, about respect for women and gays and minorities, attitudes on Radical Islam, and many other topics as part of the vetting procedure. 



https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LzHi4TgPQeI&t=27m40s
	Military, cyber, and financial warfare will all be necessary to dismantle Islamic terrorism. But we must use ideological warfare as well. Very important. And they use it on us better than we have ever even thought of using it on them but that will change. Just as we won the Cold War in part by exposing the evils of communism and the virtues of free markets, so too must we take on the ideology of radical Islam. While my opponent accepted millions of dollars in foundation donations from countries where being gay is an offense punishable by prison or death, my administration will speak out against the oppression of women, gays, and people of different beliefs.

	Our administration would be a friend to all moderate Muslim reformers in the Middle East and will amplify their voices. This includes speaking out against the horrible practice of honor killings where women are murdered by their relatives for dressing, marrying, or acting in a way that violates fundamentalist teachings.

	...To defeat Islamic terrorism, we must also speak out forcefully against a hateful ideology that provides the breeding ground for violence and terrorism to grow. It's a breeding ground. It's a terrible, terrible breeding ground. A new immigration policy is needed immediately and as well. The common thread linking the major Islamic terrorist attacks that have recently occurred on our soil ...is that they have involved immigrants or the children of immigrants. Clearly, new screening procedures are needed.



goes on about how immigrants must have Amiercan values, should not believe Sharia law over American law


they basically put his stump speech on Islamic immigration in the EO but removed the word "Islam"


text of above (slightly different):

https://assets.donaldjtrump.com/DJT_Radical_Islam_Speech.pdf
	In addition to screening out allmembers or sympathizers of terrorist groups, we must also screen out any who have hostile attitudes towards our country or its principles–or who believe that Sharia law should supplant American law.  Those who do not believe in our Constitution,or whosupport bigotry and hatred, will not be admitted for immigration into the country.Only those who we expect to flourish in our country –and toembrace a tolerant American society–should be issuedimmigrationvisas.To put these new procedures in place, we will have to temporarily suspend immigration from some of the most dangerous and volatile regions of the worldthat have a history of exporting terrorism.As soon as I take office, I will ask the State Department and the Department of Homeland Security to identify a list of regions where adequate screening cannot take place.  We will stop processing visas from those areas until such time as it is deemed safe to resume based on new circumstances or new procedures.


Similar language to EO, references EO, but in public statements has references to Islam, religion

filename is "DJT Radical Islam Speech"...


------


https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2017/02/09/17-35105.pdf


this is the decision on the Fed emergency motion to stay after the courts ruled against the 1st order.

 	The impact of the Executive Order was immediate and widespread. It was reported that thousands of visas were immediately canceled, hundreds of travelers with such visas were prevented from boarding airplanes bound for the United States or denied entry on arrival, and some travelers were detained. Three days later, on January 30, 2017, the State of Washington filed suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Washington, challenging sections 3(c), 5(a) -(c), and 5(e) of the Executive Order, naming as defendants the President, the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, the Secretary of State, and the United States (collectively, “the Government”). Washington alleged that the Executive Order unconstitutionally and illegally stranded its residents abroad, split their families, restricted their travel, and damaged the State’s economy and public universities in violation of the First and Fifth Amendments, the INA, the Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, and the Administrative Procedure Act. Washington also alleged that the Executive Order was not truly meant to protect against terror attacks by foreign nationals but rather was intended to enact a “Muslim ban” as the President had stated during his presidential campaign that he would do.


 order split families and stranded Washington residents abroad, and Washington sued for damages. The filed for emergency temporary restraining order and got it.


 	...To establish Article III standing, a plaintiff must demonstrate “that it has suffered a concrete and particularized injury that is either actual or imminent, that the injury is fairly traceable to the defendant, and that it is likely that a favorable decision will redress that injury.” Id.(citing Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560-61).

 	...The States argue that the Executive Order causes a concrete and particularized injury to their public universities, which the parties do not dispute are branches of the States under state law. See, e.g., Hontz v. State, 714 P.2d 1176, 1180 (Wash. 1986) (en banc); Univ. of Minn. v. Raygor, 620 N.W.2d 680, 683 (Minn. 2001). 

 	...Specifically, the States allege that the teaching and research missions of their universities are harmed by the Executive Order’s effect on their faculty and students who are nationals of the seven affected countries. These students and faculty cannot travel for research, academic collaboration, or for personal reasons, and their families abroad cannot visit. Some have been stranded outside the country, unable to return to the universities at all. The schools cannot consider attractive student candidates and cannot hire faculty from the seven affected countries, which they have done in the past.


If I read this right, the states need to show injury to bring litigation. If the rollout was smooth, the litigation would never have happened.

(not exactly true: can and did still argue injury in e.g. lost tuition and fees from students canceling at universities, losses from researches leaving. The rough rollout wasn't necessary for litigation but did make it urgent and hard to beat)


	...According to declarations filed by the States, for example, two visiting scholars who had planned to spend time at Washington State University were not permitted to enter the United States; one was informed he would be unable to obtain a visa. Similarly, the University of Washington was in the process of sponsoring three prospective employees from countries covered by the Executive Order for visas; it had made plans for their arrival beginning in February 2017, but they have been unable to enter the United States. The University of Washington also sponsored two medicine and science interns who have been prevented by the Executive Order from coming to the University of Washington. The University of Washington has already incurred the costs of visa applications for those interns and will lose its investment if they are not admitted. Both schools have a mission of “global engagement” and rely on such visiting students, scholars, and faculty to advance their educational goals. Students and faculty at Minnesota’s public universities were similarly restricted from traveling for academic and personal reasons. 

	Under the “third party standing” doctrine, these injuries to the state universities give the States standing to assert the rights of the students, scholars, and faculty affected by the Executive Order.


researchers and students weren't able to return back to unis, which gave them standing. Could have been avoided if the EO had clear and fair direction for visa holders and lawful permanent residents.


pg 13

government has no good legal argument for EO, basically tries to argue it's unreviewable

the argument sounds really dumb, like they're not even trying

"no precedent" for this claim, "runs contrary to the fundamental structure of our constitutional democracy." "repeated and explicitly" rejected this notion of unreviewability in immigration policy.


	...Nonetheless, “courts are not powerless to review the political branches’ actions” with respect to matters of national security. Alperin v. Vatican Bank, 410 F.3d 532, 559 n.17 (9th Cir. 2005). To the contrary, while counseling deference to the national security determinations of the political branches, the Supreme Court has made clear that the Government’s “authority and expertise in [such] matters do not automatically trump the Court’s own obligation to secure the protection that the Constitution grants to individuals,” even in times of war. Humanitarian Law Project, 561 U.S. at 34 (quoting id.at 61 (Breyer, J., dissenting)); see also United States v. Robel, 389 U.S. 258, 264 (1967) (“‘[N]ational defense’ cannot be deemed an end in itself, justifying any exercise of legislative power designed to promote such a goal. . . . It would indeed be ironic if, in the name of national defense, we would sanction the subversion of one of those liberties . . . which makes the defense of the Nation worthwhile.”)


a good counter-argument to Trump's travel ban for "national security"


pg 17

Federal courts routinely review and invalidate the constiutionality of actions taken to promote national security

example of "in the name of national security" being abused in other countries? I think Putin did that after beslan massacre


pg 19

Gov did not show it was likely to succeed on States' due process claims or religions discrimination claims


	...The Fifth Amendment of the Constitution prohibits the Government from depriving individuals of their “life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.” U.S. Const. amend. V. The Government may not deprive a person of one of these protected interests without providing “notice and an opportunity to respond,” or, in other words, the opportunity to present reasons not to proceed with the deprivation and have them considered. United States v. Raya-Vaca, 771 F.3d 1195, 1204 (9th Cir. 2014); accordCleveland Bd. of Educ. v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532, 542 (1985); ASSE Int’l, Inc. v. Kerry, 803 F.3d 1059, 1073 (9th Cir. 2015). 

	The Government has not shown that the Executive Order provides what due process requires, such as notice and a hearing prior to restricting an individual’s ability to travel. Indeed, the Government does not contend that the Executive Order provides for such process. Rather, in addition to the arguments addressed in other parts of this opinion, the Government argues that most or all of the individuals affected by the Executive Order have no rights under the Due Process Clause.

	In the district court, the States argued that the Executive Order violates the procedural due process rights of various aliens in at least three independent ways. First, section 3(c) denies re-entry to certain lawful permanent residents and non-immigrant visaholders without constitutionally sufficient notice and an opportunity to respond. Second, section 3(c) prohibits certain lawful permanent residents and non-immigrant visaholders from exercising their separate and independent constitutionally protected liberty interests in travelling abroad and thereafter re-entering the United States. Third, section 5 contravenes the procedures provided by federal statute for refugees seeking asylum and related relief in the United States. The district court held generally in the TRO that the States were likely to prevail on the merits of their due process claims

	...The procedural protections provided by the Fifth Amendment’s Due Process Clause are not limited to citizens. Rather, they “appl[y] to all ‘persons’ within the United States, including aliens,” regardless of “whether their presence here is lawful, unlawful, temporary, or permanent.” Zadvydas v. Davis, 533 U.S. 678, 693 (2001). These rights also apply to certain aliens attempting to reenter the United States after travelling abroad. Landon v. Plasencia, 459 U.S. 21, 33-34 (1982). The Government has provided no affirmative argument showing that the States’ procedural due process claims fail as to these categories of aliens. For example, the Government has failed to establish that lawful permanent residents have no due process rights when seeking to re-enter the United States. See id.(“[T]he returning resident alien is entitled as a matter of due process to a hearing on the charges underlying any attempt to exclude him.” (quoting Rosenberg v. Fleuti, 374 U.S. 449, 460 (1963))). Nor has the Government established that the Executive Order provides lawful permanent residents with constitutionally sufficient process to challenge their denial of re-entry. Seeid.at 35 (“[T]he courts must evaluate the particular circumstances and determine what procedures would satisfy the minimum requirements of due process on the re-entry of a permanent resident alien.”).


to restrict travel of citizens, green card holders or anyone reintering U.S., gov has to follow due process. 5th amendment applies to lawful permanent residents. Sounds like this is legally easy to get but Trump team somehow screwed it up anyway. The gov tried to argue Don McGahn's letter "claryfingt" that the EO doesn't apply to lawful permanent residents 3 days later makes it ok, but the court didn't buy it.



	pg 23

the gov tried to argue that the TRO was too broad and should only apply to green card holders. But if they could figure that out a few days after signing it, why not a few days before...


	...More generally, even if the TRO might be overbroad in some respects, it is not our role to try, in effect, to rewrite the Executive Order. See United States v. Nat’l Treasury Emps. Union, 513 U.S. 454, 479 (1995) (declining to rewrite a statute to eliminate constitutional defects)


gee, I wonder if there's someone who's job is to help with that...


	...The States argue that the Executive Order violates the Establishment and Equal Protection Clauses because it was intended to disfavor Muslims. In support of this argument, the States have offered evidence of numerous statements by the President about his intent to implement a “Muslim ban” as well as evidence they claim suggests that the Executive Order was intended to be that ban, including sections 5(b) and 5(e) of the Order. It is well established that evidence of purpose beyond the face of the challenged law may be considered in evaluating Establishment and Equal Protection Clause claims. 


basically: Trump said he wanted a Muslim ban, and this is that ban. 5(b) and 5(e) are the sections where the EO allows the secretary of state to prioritize persecuted religious minorities. If the EO was an urgent matter of national security, why put those in there at all?

also gels with Trump public statements. Trump went on TV right after EO signed to say he wants to prioritize christian refugees.


	...The Government has not shown that a stay is necessary to avoid irreparable injury. Nken, 556 U.S. at 434. Although we agree that “the Government’s interest in combating terrorism is an urgent objective of the highest order,” Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project, 561 U.S. 1, 28 (2010), the Government has done little more than reiterate that fact. Despite the district court’s and our own repeated invitations to explain the urgent need for the Executive Order to be placed immediately into effect, the Government submitted no evidence to rebut the States’ argument that the district court’s order merely returned the nation temporarily to the position it has occupied for many previous years. 


Gov argues in court EO needed for national security. But hard to argue the EO is urgent when all injunction would do is return U.S. to state it was for years. Also can't argue injury from injunction on EO is "irreparable."


	...To the extent that the Government claims that it has suffered an institutional injury by erosion of the separation of powers, that injury is not “irreparable.” It may yet pursue and vindicate its interests in the full course of this litigation. See, e.g.,Texas v. United States, 787 F.3d 733, 767-68 (5th Cir. 2015) (“[I]t is the resolution of the case on the merits, not whether the injunction is stayed pending appeal, that will affect those principles.”).

	By contrast, the States have offered ample evidence that if the Executive Order were reinstated even temporarily, it would substantially injure the States and multiple “other parties interested in the proceeding.” Nken, 556 U.S. at 434 (quoting Hilton v. Braunskill, 481 U.S. 770, 776 (1987)). When the Executive Order was in effect, the States contend that the travel prohibitions harmed the States’ university employees and students, separated families, and stranded the States’ residents abroad. These are substantial injuries and even irreparable harms. See Melendres v. Arpaio, 695 F.3d 990, 1002 (9th Cir. 2012) (“It is well established that the deprivation of constitutional rights ‘unquestionably constitutes irreparable injury.’” (quoting Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347, 373 (1976))).


the damages the EO did to stranded people made it hard to argue for it in court

was part of closing of the decision to deny stay


	...For  the  foregoing  reasons,  the  emergency  motion  for  a  stay pending appeal is DENIED.



------


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/02/us/trump-travel-ban.html
	It took nearly two hours from when President Trump signed his first attempt at a travel ban for the head of United States Customs and Border Protection to get an official version of the president’s executive order.

	In the hours that followed, officials scrambled to figure out how to enforce the order and — as protesters, lawyers and politicians swarmed airports — they monitored the demonstrations with detailed granularity, setting up a “Crisis Action Team” to coordinate their response.

	As officials begin to roll out President Trump’s latest attempt to severely restrict visitors from certain countries, internal documents provided to The New York Times offer a look at how the government tried to carry out his initial attempt at a travel ban.


nytimes given documents showing chaos of travel ban

Matt Stevens a bit suspicious though


	...Gene Hamilton, a senior counselor at the Department of Homeland Security, wrote that green card holders should generally be given a case-by-case exemption, “provided that it is in the national interest to do so (i.e. provided that there is no security risk posed, meaning that there should be a revetting of sorts).”


did they want it to be up in the air as to whether green card holders should be detained? courts seemed convinced the order applied to green card holders, and some were detained


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/politics/donald-trump-travel-ban/index.html
	Friday night, DHS arrived at the legal interpretation that the executive order restrictions applying to seven countries -- Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Syria, Sudan and Yemen -- did not apply to people with lawful permanent residence, generally referred to as green card holders. 

	The White House overruled that guidance overnight, according to officials familiar with the rollout. That order came from the President's inner circle, led by Stephen Miller and Steve Bannon. Their decision held that, on a case by case basis, DHS could allow green card holders to enter the US.


is this what happened?

also remembered at some point Kelly tried to declare that admitting LPRs is "in the national interest" 

------


more court docs:

https://www.politico.com/f/?id=0000015a-d493-d536-a37b-d4d7f9b30000


http://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/general/2017/02/06/17-35105%20Washington%20Opposition.pdf



------

Aziz vs. Trump

case 1:17-cv-00116-LMB-TCB doc 111

https://cases.justia.com/federal/district-courts/virginia/vaedce/1:2017cv00116/358386/111/0.pdf?ts=1487078541


	The EO was initially applied to LPRs, and the defendants have since conded that Customs and Border Patrol ("CBP") initially stopped several LPRs at the border in the 24 to 48 hours aft erhe EO was signed, although they represent that all such persons have since been permitted to enter the United States. After initial confusion within the executive branch, [Dkt. 61-17], Homeland Security John Kelly released a statement on Sunday, January 29, announcing that he "deem[ed] the entry of lawful permanent residents to be in the national interest" and that "lawfulpermanent resident status will be a dispotive factor in our case-by-case determinations," [Dkt. 61-1].

	The next day, White House Counsel Donald F. McGahn II issued a memorandum stating that "there has been reasonable uncertainty about wheter [Section 3 of the EO] apl[ies] to lawful permanent residents of te United States. Accordingly, to remove any confusion, I now clarify that Section 3(c)...do[es] not apply to such individuals." [Dkt. 34-1]. Defendants have argued that in light of this memorandum, the EO cannot be interpreted to apply to LPRs; however, a voluntary change of policy cannot be taken asbinding unless it is "absolutely clear" that the government will not revert to its original position. ...the Court finds that the EO presents an ongoing risk to the status of LPRs from the seven countries covered by the EO.


EO more or less plainly said LPR's would be detained, and initially LPRs were detained, but there was still confusion on this issue. On 29th, Kelly issued statement saying LPR's entering "in the national interest," so basically using the EO's "case by case" provision to allow LPRs. On 30th, McGahn memo says EO does not apply to LPRs.

McGahn's memo and Kelly's statement create a narrative that barring LPRs was a mistake. Government wanted to argue EO didn't apply to LPRs based on this memo, although this was rejected by courts. If I understand right, they wanted to argue that cases involving detaining of LPR's didn't have standing since the interpretation of the EO had changed.


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/?utm_term=.63af920b47ef
	YATES: Well, certainly there was discussion with the White House about litigation strategy, but that occurred, to my knowledge, over the weekend. But, after the 30th, when I issued my directive, I was gone then that evening around 9:00, so I don't know what other discussions occurred after that.


McGahn directed issued a few hours before Yates fired. 


https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/3438879/Letter-From-Sally-Yates.pdf


no date, but looks like McGahn's memo and Yate's decision came close to each other. Any reason? I guess it could make Yates' argument to not defend the ban a little more complicated. With detaining LPRs, the due process violations are clear and egregious, but if the Trump admin could muddle that a bit it would make the argument against defending the ban less impactful. Can see in Yate's testimony, she said "there were also due process concerns" but she mostly focused on how Trump's public statements made it clear what the intent of the ban was. In court docs (Washington vs Trump stay denied) they primarily looked at due process to deny stay, and only said there were "serious concerns" about religious freedom without (iirc) making a final judgement on the government's likelihood to win on that point.




------

https://www.lawfareblog.com/quick-thoughts-sally-yates-unpersuasive-statement

Here's Jack Goldsmith saying Yates' decision was wrong


did Yates actually write the memo?



------


https://cases.justia.com/federal/district-courts/virginia/vaedce/1:2017cv00116/358386/111/0.pdf?ts=1487078541

pg 4

university students withdrew applications from Virginia universities after EO

Virginia estimate $20.8 million in lost tuition and fees, inhibit research


pg 6 national security professions say no terror attack from named countries in past 5 years


pg 7 Trump saying to Bill O'Reillin in 2015 there's a "muslim problem in the world."


pg 8 Trump (or Pence with Trump nearby) asked about Muslim ban being unconstitutional, says "so you call it territories, OK?"


and Trump prioritizing Christian refugees

pg 17 summarizing arguments that intent was Muslim ban


	The Commonwealth has produced unrebutted evidence supporting its position that it is likely to succeed on an Establishment Clause claim.


pg 18


	The "specific sequence of events" leading to the adoption of the EO bolsters the Commonwealth's argument that the EO was not motivated by rational national security concerns. As the declaration from the national security experts states, ordinarily an executive order prioritizing national security is based on "cleared views from expert agencies with broad experience on the matters presented to [the president]." [Dkt. 57] at P. 7. But here there is no evidence that such a deliberative process took place. Id. To the contrary, there is evidence that the president's senior national security officials were taken by surprise. See [Dkt. 61-17]. Although Guliani suggested the EO was formulated by a "whole group of very expert lawyers and at least two members of Congress, this process appears to have taken place during the campaign and there is no evidence that this commission was privy to any national security information when developing the policy." See [Dkt. 61-4]. Once again, defendants have offered no evidence to the contrary.


Court found evidence national security officials were taken by surprise, EO developed during campaign


Docket 61 I guess this:

https://www.courtlistener.com/docket/4576795/aziz-v-trump/
	Declaration re 23 MOTION for Preliminary Injunction , 31 Brief in Support [Declaration of Mamoona "Mona" Siddiqui] by Commonwealth of Virginia. (Attachments: # 1 Exhibit 1, # 2 Exhibit 2, # 3 Exhibit 3, # 4 Exhibit 4, # 5 Exhibit 5, # 6 Exhibit 6, # 7 Exhibit 7, # 8 Exhibit 8, # 9 Exhibit 9, # 10 Exhibit 10, # 11 Exhibit 11, # 12 Exhibit 12, # 13 Exhibit 13, # 14 Exhibit 14, # 15 Exhibit 15, # 16 Exhibit 16, # 17 Exhibit 17, # 18 Exhibit 18, # 19 Exhibit 19, # 20 Exhibit 20, # 21 Exhibit 21, # 22 Exhibit 22)(Raphael, Stuart) (Entered: 02/08/2017)


Dkt 61-17 is an article by Josh Rogin...


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0036.pdf

"Inside the White House-Cabinet battle of Trump's immigration order"

	One White House official and one administration official told me that the Cabinet officials presented a united front and
complained about the process that led to the issuance of the immigration executive order, focusing on their near­complete
lack of consultation as well as the White House’s reluctance to make what they saw as common­sense revisions, such as
exempting green­card holders.


so one anonymous source says cabinet officials upset WH "reluctant" to make commense-sense revision like excemption for LPR


seem to be blaming it on a plot for chaos by Bannon


	Bannon and Miller pushed back, defending the White House’s actions and explaining that the process and substance of the
order had been kept to a close circle because the Trump administration had not yet installed its own officials in key
government roles and other officials were still getting settled into place.


	Flynn, according to the White House official, partially sided with the Cabinet officials, arguing that they should be included in
the process, even if the White House ultimately decided not to adopt their recommendations.


so apparently the WH was getting reccomendations to fix the EO but Bannon argued against them

says they pushed for McGahn memo to "clarify" EO

paints the EO as a win for bannon, a policy decision


------

in Aziz case, docket 61 Exhibit 4 is an article by Amy Wang on WaPo

"Trump asked for a ‘Muslim
ban,’ Giuliani says — and
ordered a commission to do it
‘legally’"

cited to say the EO was developed during the campaign

don't see where it says that



------

did the Trump admin act in ways to make the EO's implementation happen in a way that litigation against it would immediately follow? the detaining of LPRs and visa holders, stranding them would immediately give courts standing to bring litigation that Trump would all but certainly lose (if I get this right). Are there signs that this was a deliberate and concscious act of the Trump admin?


that the EO more or less plainly blocked visa and green-card holders effective immediately seems as far as I can tell the reason that lawful residents got stranded. This created court cases that it would be impossible for the DOJ to defend without lying (and without looking awful). The importnant question is was this an act of idiocy or something else?


media tries to paint it as Trump "rushing" EO, listening to Bannon (who wants to "destroy the state"), being paranoid about informing "Obama holdovers," and wanting to implement his Muslim ban.


Trump has done things that seem more calculated and not idiocy:

rewriting order of succession for AG (although he was undoing an Obama EO so he has an alibi there)


has another alibi for that:

http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-immigration-justice-20170130-story.html
	In addition, Yates was the only person in the department authorized to sign wiretapping warrants in foreign espionage cases involving the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court.

	Justice Department lawyers had initially questioned whether someone who had not been confirmed to one of three top Justice Department positions could legally perform that job. They eventually concluded that Boente would qualify.


problem is Trump is demonstrably an idiot. He's remarks on the Charolltsville terrorist attack are convincing evidence.


if Trump lied in his public statements about the ban would show he's being more sly. Did the conversation with Kelly occur like Trump put it?


------

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/18/world/trump-new-travel-ban.html
	Enforcement of the earlier order was marked by confusion and distress, leaving many of the affected travelers stranded overseas. “I will have, this time, the opportunity to work on a rollout plan,” Mr. Kelly said.


Kelly says he didn't work on a rollout plan, but Trump says he consulted Kelly on the rollout "plan" and got the idea for not telling anyone about it before pushing out.


	The new approach, he said, would try to ensure that no travelers were caught in transit, as they had been under the first executive order. “If they are in motion from some distant land, when they arrive they will be allowed in,” Mr. Kelly said. He said that would apply to both green card and visa holders.


this is the main problem with EO that led to airtight cases against it. Harder for that to happen if DHS and others had time to interpret and roll it out.

If DHS had time, same thing were they ask to clarify if ban applies to LPRs, people in transit, but they wouldn't be stranded in the meantime. If gov wanted to double down on that after requests, would have to willfully screw over specific people. The way it was done instead, rushing the ban out, the gov can claim "confusion," but the damage is already done.


maybe this is important, better way to look at it: if ban wasn't done without warning (and so stranding people in transit), would litigation against it have been slower? (look to revised ban as a guess). Figure the faster and higher stakes the litigation, the earlier Yates would be forced to decide to defend it or not.

Maybe more here... was Yates simply waiting? why not issue her decision earlier? court cases against it happened almost immediately (like hours or next day). Memo came on 30th. Yates was fired right before DOJ could go over Flynn call evidence with WH. Even more interesting if Yates didn't write her memo.



memo thing worth looking into. She was about to bring in McGahn to see evidence. OLC analysis was day-of and she already waited three days. The wording kindof sounded like insubordination. Why write that and why publish it then?

Comey statement also has hints of being ghost-written--tit for tat?


what prompted memo? court date? internal pressure? I guess idea is to force Yates to make a decision on the travel ban before she can be a witness to how the Trump admin handled the investigation of the Flynn calls.


Yates memo same day as McGahn memo--in anticpication of some court proceeding on the ban?

memos were on monday, ban went out friday. Would make sense for court dates to be early in next week.

how about the govs application for an emergency stay?


https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2017/02/09/17-35105.pdf


pg 5

state of Washington filed suit on January 30, gov challenge was two days later. Not sure exactly when DOJ would be forced to make a decision on whether or not to defend, or if fast litigation could have happened without people being stranded. The emergency hearings probably wouldn't have happened without that.

------

what happened with second travel ban?


http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-39225773

second ban (with rollout plan, week's notice) launched on March 6, but I think this is saying legal challenges didn't start until the 10th?


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/08/us/trump-travel-ban-hawaii.html

Hawaii first sued March 8, two days after ban signed


does this matter or not? When/what exactly would force Yates to make a decision on defending travel ban?


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2017/01/30/trump-says-all-is-going-well-on-immigration-order-amid-questions-and-confusion/?utm_term=.ea948dd65559
	On Monday, in what could be the first volley in an intense legal battle, Bob Ferguson, Washington state’s attorney general, said he plans to file a federal lawsuit seeking an immediate halt to the order’s implementation.

	Ferguson is the first state official to declare plans to file such a suit,


"declare plans" to file suit doesn't set any dates in stone I don't think?

what else was there? hearings on the TRO? were the emergency rulings over in the courts after the weekend?



http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-immigration-justice-20170130-story.html
	In court hearings so far, Justice Department lawyers have struggled to defend the order or answer questions from judges about the legal issues involved. 


well, people from DOJ were already defending it in court...


so why did Yates make her decision when she did? (if she did)

maybe something simple like: it being a weekday...

she testified that DOJ was in contact with WH on how to defend the ban over the weekend.

all the horrible things going on with ban and fast pace of legal challenges would put pressure on her

I guess this is true: with second ban, without causing emergencies and stranding people, DOJ not in court since some time after two days after ban signed

with first ban, DOJ in court immediately (over the weekend)

so Yates would come into work and find DOJ lawyers, according to LA times, "struggling to defned the order and answer questions from judges."

And this is one way the ban would pressure Yates to make a decision quickly.

But I do not see how it would force her to make a decision right then on the 30th. If she wants to keep her job for even one more day (a good idea with the thing with Flynn calls and McGahn going on), why not wait till 31st?



------


http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-immigration-justice-20170130-story.html
	Yates agonized all weekend, according to a person familiar with her deliberations, debating whether to resign or to direct federal prosecutors not to defend Trump’s order. Eventually, knowing that it would probably cost her the job, she decided to write the letter.


an anonymous source says Yates agonized over the weekend and decided whether or not to resign or decide against defending the order

different from Yates' testimony, where she says they were in contact with WH on how to defend and were reviewing if the order was legal or not


	...Trump tweeted Monday that if the order had been publicized in advance for a week, “the ‘bad’ would rush into our country during that week.” That is untrue. The process of getting a visa from any of the covered countries typically takes months.


that's a good point...


	...Legal experts predict the court fights over the law could be lengthy and complex.


they seemed pretty straightforward to me? article is sketchy


https://www.cbsnews.com/news/acting-us-attorney-general-directs-justice-department-not-to-defend-trump-travel-ban/
	The executive order banning new arrivals and refugees from the seven Muslim-majority countries had already been challenged in court a number of times, and has sparked widespread protests in major cities. On Saturday, the Justice Department defended the order before a court in Brooklyn. Yates’ decision signified a major about-face by the department. 


DOJ was defended EO and defended in Brooklyn. LA times article seems off but says they were "struggling." A better source probably the court documents, which say the governments arguments are bad and make no sense.

Trump pointed out OLC, part of DOJ, approved ban for "form and legality."


what does Yates say about her supposed decision to order DOJ not to defend the ban?


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/?utm_term=.4b8efdde603a
	Is it true that the Office of Legal Counsel did conclude it was lawful on its face and properly drafted?

	YATES: Yes, they did. The office of...

	CORNYN: And you overruled them?

	YATES: ... I did. The office of legal...


whether memo was ghostwritten or not, it's on the record that she overulled them and she's going with it.

since DOJ not told about it (if I read her testimony right), they would have had an even tougher time defending it in court



https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/?utm_term=.4b8efdde603a
	YATES: ...we told him that we were inclined to allow them to look at that underlying evidence, that we wanted to go back to DOJ and be able to make the logistical arrangements for that. This second meeting on the 27th occurred late in the afternoon, this is Friday the 27th. So we told him that we would work with the FBI over the weekend on this issue and get back with him on Monday morning. And I called him first thing Monday morning to let him know that we would allow them to come over and to review the underlying evidence.


busy weekend for Yates


	...YATES: Two meetings and then a phone call at the end to let him know...

	WHITEHOUSE: That the material was available if he wanted to see it.

	YATES: ... that the material was available. He had to call me back. He was not available then and I did not hear back from him until that afternoon of Monday the 30th.

	WHITEHOUSE: And that was the end of this episode, nobody came over to look at the material?

	YATES: I don't know what happened after that because that was my last day with DOJ.


McGahn busy that day? couldn't come go through evidence until later in afternoon. Was also writing that "clarification" that day.


Why would Yates write her memo after this...


	...LEAHY: No, but I mean, did anybody from the White House try to direct the Justice Department how they should respond on that executive order?

	YATES: Well, certainly there was discussion with the White House about litigation strategy, but that occurred, to my knowledge, over the weekend. But, after the 30th, when I issued my directive, I was gone then that evening around 9:00, so I don't know what other discussions occurred after that.


Yates knew of litigation strategy discussion with WH over the weekend but sounds like she wasn't involved.



------

so why did Yates decide to refuse to defend the travel ban then and there?

assuming it wasn't ghostwritten

Can only speculate, since she gives a vague answer. She was advised that she would have to take a position on the contitutionality, maybe with a Monday deadline.

DOJ officials were not breifed of the ban and Yates had not even heard of it until after it was signed. Almost immediately after it was signed, lawful residents and visa holders were stranded and multiple serious cases were brought against the government as a result. Courts held emergency hearings on the ban over the weekend, and the DOj struggled to defend the ban in court. On Monday, Yates and all the DOJ lawyers who had tried to defend the ban meet, and Yates goes over their cases and the issues with the EO. At this point, Yates can either decide to continue defending the ban in court or decline, and she decides to decline (this last sentence can be said about just about any point after the 27th...)


Is this the reason? only a guess. But the guess is: after meeting with all these lawyers on Monday (I guess she was working weekends though?), they come to her and they are struggling and at this point after chaos the DOJ realizes they need an actual litigation strategy, something they never had the chance to develop thanks to Trump not notifying them. And by then it would be apparent that the EO was undefendable, and they would be lying to themselves if they decided to go on.


So, by best guess, that time at Monday would have been when it became clear that the ban was undefendable, and making the call would have been a matter of honesty. DOJ was already in court and all but certainly preparing for a large number of court cases in the following days/weeks.


to test this guess: see how the DOJ fared in the first few emergency hearings before the 27th

look at DOJs workload for the travel ban in the days immediately following 27th

what had the DOJ done already and what were they preparing to do? Anything happening on 30th? 31st?

info on the WH discussing litigation strategy with DOJ over the weekend would be good. Only info on that could see was in Yates' testimony. Sounds like she wasn't involved.


what exactly prompted Yates to make her decision then at this point is unknown

but what's important is this: did Trump's decision to do an immediate rollout without any advance warning pressure her to make a decision quickly?

all things considered, it looks like the answer is yes: without people being stranded, emergency litigation going on, and a multitude of court cases, there would not have been an urgent need to make a decision so soon after the ban was issued (three days, one business day, dunno if she could have done it over the weekend).

they wanted her out, and they wanted her out fast



------



Trump says travel ban urgent matter of national security, but doesn't do much to make sure it will pass courts (the courts will later point out it is well-known that courts review the intent of EO's and there is due process for non-citizens.) Instead he puts things in there (part of stump speech on Muslim ban, the section on SoS prioritizing presecuted religious minorities, detaining lawful permanent residents and visa holders in transit stranding them) that make it much harder to defend in court and don't have any logical basis in helping national security. At the same time, he makes public statements that make it even hard to defend. He asked the OLC to review form and legality, and the WH instructs them not to tell DOJ about the EO. In this way, Trump missed an opportunity to find out if the ban would pass courts by his own administration's actions, and weakened the DOJ's ability to defend the ban he claimed was so urgent for national security.

At some point, Trump had decided to enforce the ban immediately without officials having time to prepare. He cites a conversation with General Kelly for this, but Kelly was kept out of the loop for many details of the rollout (when ban would be signed) and later said he wasn't involved in the rollout. Because Trump did an immediate rollout, many lawful residents got stranded and the ban faced many instance sof immediate litigation with a strong claims of damages. This led to the Justice department needing to make a decision soon on how, and if, they would defend the ban.

But, thanks to Trump's decisions, the ban was undefendable, and the acting AG, predictably, decided not to defend the ban. Trump then fires her for insubordination.



also:





The ban stranding lawful residents led directly to the emergency stay to stop the order--it meant there was immediate and serious harm that the courts would be compelled to act to reverse. This led directly to pressure on Yates and the DOJ to make their decision soon. Trump's rollout made sure the DOJ would have to act within hours after ban enforced.


Trump was aware of constitutionality concerns with Muslim ban (came up in interviews, dicussion with Gulianni)


Trump was working on the ban through his campaign (his statement on ban "evolving" into territories, anonymous senior official statement, another source I forget), but Kelly says there were last minute changes. This is strange, because Trump said the ban was an urgent matter of national security: why not have it ready as soon as he was sworn in? He says "bad dudes" would "rush in" if they knew the ban was coming, but he announced it as far back as his campaign.

hard to justify the ban addressed an urgent matter of national security on its face. Feds found that many (most? what fraction?) terrorists simply cross the border to get here. He says we need time to "figure out what's going on" but by the time the ban got through courts he already had a good chunk (or more) of the 90 days to "figure it out." His failure to get the first EO right also gave "bad dudes" plenty of notice as the ban struggled in court.

In David Muir interview on Jan 25th, Trump can't explain why countries like Afghanistan aren't on the list. And what about countries like NK? By his own logic, these "dangerous" countires should be on the ban list.

If motivated by national security, why the bit about prioitizing religious refugees? only hurting its chances in court



https://www.wsj.com/articles/acting-attorney-general-orders-justice-dept-not-to-defend-trumps-travel-ban-1485819447
	Ms. Yates’s decision is based on the series of lawsuits that were filed in the first 24 hours in which immigration officials began enforcing Mr. Trump’s order on refugees and immigrants. Civil rights and immigrant advocates sued on behalf of individuals affected by the decision, particularly legal permanent residents who suddenly found themselves in limbo at U.S. airports when the order went into effect.

	Because of those lawsuits, Justice Department lawyers have begun appearing in court to defend the legality of the order, meaning that Ms. Yates ended up overseeing, albeit temporarily, the legal position of the Trump administration.


this explains it well



------


puzzles in travel ban:



Why do EO at all?

Trump alibi: it's for national security


why roll-out immediately without warning?

Trump alibi: didn't want to give "bad dudes" warning to enter country (didn't think this at first but changed his mind because Kelly said something)


why so much chaos?

Trump alibi: delta computer outage, protestors, Senator Schumer's tears (https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/826041397232943104) (and http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
)


why not tell DOJ ahead of time?

Trump alibi (not his words?): DOJ officials Obama holdovers, and therefore cannot be trusted (might be leakers!)


Why that language about religion in there, the prioritizing refugees thing, if about national security?

Trump alibi: ???


Why public statements making intent clear that it is a Muslim ban?

Trump alibi: it's not a Muslim ban


Why fire Yates?

Trump alibi: insubordination, "Obama AG", democrats obstructing (in his tweet I think "I can't believe this horrible obstruction!", probably cite Dems delaying sessions vote, first reported he was lock-in, later delay reported on 23rd, on 24th they delay panel confirm from 24th to 31st, which is weird since full confirmation a week later anyway).



------


https://www.cbsnews.com/news/trump-immigration-ban-still-in-place-despite-court-ruling-homeland-security-department-says/
	Trump travel ban still in place despite court ruling, DHS says

	WASHINGTON --  The Department of Homeland Security says a New York court order temporarily barring the U.S. from deporting people from nations subject to President Donald Trump’s travel ban will not affect the overall implementation of the White House executive action.

	The agency said the court order affected a relatively small number of travelers who were inconvenienced by security procedures upon their return.

	The department’s statement said: “President Trump’s Executive Orders remain in place - prohibited travel will remain prohibited, and the U.S. government retains its right to revoke visas at any time if required for national security or public safety,” according to the DHS statement.

	...Stephen Miller, a senior adviser to the White House, said that nothing in the judge’s order “in anyway impedes or prevents the implementation of the president’s executive order which remains in full, complete and total effect.”


explicitly defying court order--not going to help legal fights

this is in response to the Donelly ruling

actually they aren't explicity defying

they are muddily defying.. they say it "won't affect," so what does that mean? wht did they tell DHS?

iirc, in court pointed out that Donelly ruling did not explicitly mention LPRs, and the boston hearing asked to clarify this

wouldn't they have known LPRs were stranded by this point?

it happened instantly, as soon as ban in effect (should have known before)

why direct not to allow them? 


	...Nearly two days after the president’s executive action, the Justice Department also made its first comments about the order. 

	A senior Justice Department official told CBS News that the Office of Legal Counsel (OLC), traditionally charged with reviewing executive orders for form and legality before they’re issued, had looked at the order before Mr. Trump signed it Friday. 

	“Through administrations of both parties, the Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) has consistently been asked by the White House to review Executive Orders for form and legality before they are issued,” the DOJ official said in a statement. “That review is limited to the narrow question of whether, in OLC’s view, a proposed Executive Order is on its face lawful and properly drafted.”

	“OLC has continued to serve this traditional role in the present administration,” the statement said.


OLC did a review, saw order before signed, DOJ saying they "reviewed form and legality" like they usually do 


------


https://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-visa-ban-also-applies-to-citizens-with-dual-nationality-state-department-says-1485628654?mod=e2tw
	BAGHDAD—Citizens of the seven countries identified by President Donald Trump for a 90-day visa ban who hold dual nationality also will be barred from entering the U.S., State Department officials said Saturday.


	... The dual-citizenship ban doesn’t apply to U.S. citizens who are also citizens of the seven nations singled out by Mr. Trump. An earlier headline on this article said the ban applies to citizens with dual nationality, without clarifying that it did not include U.S. citizens. Also, State Department officials relayed information about the visa ban affecting certain countries. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said that information would be released in a State Department statement. (Jan. 30) 


state dept chickened out on releasing this doc?


------


strategy for firing Yates and getting away with it?

I think it's this:


don't tell DOJ anything

have ban that applies to LPRs on its face

cause chaos, give conflicting statements, do all sorts of things so that LPRs get detained, stranded while EO in effect

carfully ensure that none of the ways LPRs were actually barred from travel can be traced back to you. Have someone hack AQQ, have chaos so anyone detaining can argue unsure of instructions, anything so that it can't ultimately be blamed on administration.

But keep this all internel: public, DOJ, does not know this in the first few days of ban. They see EO applies to LPRs on its face, and LPRs getting stranded.

end up with court docs that look unwinnable, DOJ despondent, Yates doesn't defend

fire Yates

reveal internal chaos, "system" to let in LPRs (they can all just apply for waivers!) afterward and get away with it


...


possibility that AQQ hacked so that LPRs stranded should be considered


on one hand, someone in CPB did start manually removing LPRs from GES over weekend. Reasonable to suspect then that they could have done same for electronic visa system (EVUS I think) which would send "no board" responses to airlines trying to board LPRs.


On the other hand, if they wanted to get away with this seems like a bad thing to do.

If someone (GRU?) hacked AQQ, would have stronger alibi. Already have delta outage, and computer problems with CBP systems on 27th. So have cover there.

Also have in media Russia, NK hacking to "cause chaos." Hacking airlines during ban seems like a justifiable way to cause chaos.

Hacking for specific people's response also another benefit: they can pick and chose who gets barred from entry. This way, they can control who is actually brining court cases against the admin, and be able to kill them when things die down.


...


I think this is right way to put it

Yates might not have got an unwinnable court case on her desk Jan 30, but did get one that with facts available at the time appeared unwinnable.



...


seems to be something they use a lot--rely on people making false assumptions to set them up.

What if Trump made private statements positive toward Muslims or that hurt argument ban was intended to be a Muslim ban? then could get away with that too.

would be a good strategy: create the appearance of an unwinnable case, have Yates refuse to defend, then go to court and win

would be harder to argue she was wrongly fired then

but if this was strat, did it go as planned? case of 12 year old daughter of U.S. citizen barred from entry, others seem pretty clear cut.

and you do see that behavior with Trump's actions--if you really wanted to seal the deal on Yates firing, you'd take the ban all the way to the supreme court and win.

Instead, they withdrew the ban at the last minute, did another "fixed" one, then changed that one at the last minute too.


...


but is most significant that Yates and DOJ not informed of details that would help them win

look what came out after she was fired, things like DHS FAQ saying all but 2 LPRs admitted, having waiver solution for awhile

if all they DOJ had to go by was media and court docs looks hopeless, but internal position of CBP as revealed by emails actually looks defensable: basically, we're letting in LPRs and doing it through waiver system.


also most significant that they didn't do things to help win or prevent these court cases in the first place: they realized problems with the ban applying to LPRs immediately. Why not issue McGhan memo on Jan 27th? or have that in EO to begin with?

why have statements like "it will bar green card holders" (which end up getting cited in court docs)

and even if dead-set on waiver workaround, why not issue clear guidance to airlines, CBP, public about how it works right away?

why did their rollout end up with LPRs getting stranded? why removing LPRs from GES? would be pretty clear that preventing this important for preventing TRO and so important for national security.

that court cases that pressure DOJ and Yates to make her decision only happened because of inexusable actions by the administration.


------

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MD-0004-0001.pdf
	All seven banned countries have 
overwhelmingly Muslim populations. 
58.
Moreover, 82% percent of all Muslim refugees
 who entered the United States in fiscal 
years 2014 through 2016 hailed from those seven countries. 


hey that's a good point


------

http://www.askthepilot.com/trump-and-the-travel-ban/

guy has a good point on the countries

don't make sense for national security, or even for a muslim ban

make sense if want to make ban just illegal enough to fire Yates while having justification (Obama named the countries) to defend later in court

also makes sense for political cover ("obama did it")