

https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/1015.html
	Prof. Nietzsche was one of the most prominent of modern German philosophers, and he is considered the apostle of extreme modern rationalism and one of the founders of the socialistic school, whose ideas have had such a profound influence on the growth of political and social life throughout the civilized world. Nietzsche was largely influenced by the pessimism of Schopenhauer and his writings, full of revolutionary opinions, were fired with a fearless iconoclasm which surpassed the wildest dreams of contemporary free thought. His doctrines however, were inspired by lofty aspirations, while the brilliancy of his thought and diction and the epigrammatic force of his writings commanded even the admiration of his most pronounced enemies, of which he had many. 


some leads on influence, how his was popularized/who popularized him:

http://www.wnd.com/2008/06/67007/


1910 NY Times article talking about his influence:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1910/05/07/104932970.pdf


------


https://books.google.com/books?id=f5cUEHHchNAC&pg=PA258&lpg=PA25

Gorky liked him, said to have influence on Lenin



https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1904/onestep/m.htm


here I think Lenin is agreeing with Karl Kautsky that Nietzchites are whiners when they lose



https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1908/remarks/ch02a.htm
	C H A P T E R   VI
	THE PROBLEM OF MORALITY
	§ 1. IRRATIONAL MORALITY:
	MYSTICISM OR TRADITIONALISM

	...The doctrines of the intellectual anarchists like Stirner and Nietzsche rest on these same premises. 


I guess Lenin was into this stuff and thought Nietzsche was an "intellectual anarchist" (wtf is that)

Kautsky said there were some intellectuals who naturally hated the proletariat and these intellectuals were Nietzcheites

Kautsky said Nietzche is the real philosophy of the intellectual but they have to act like proletariats and work with them for their revolutions to work


------


in 1900 Trotsky writing I guess that he likes Nietzche:

https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1900/12/nietzsche.htm
	The social axis of his system (if it is permitted to offend Nietzsche’s writings with a term as vulgar in the eyes of their author as that of “system”) is the recognition of the privilege granted a few “chosen” to freely enjoy all the goods of existence. These happy chosen are not only exempted from productive labor, but also from the “labor” of domination. “It is for you to believe and serve (Dienstbarkeit)! Such is the destiny Zarathustra offers ordinary mortals in his ideal society, whose number is too great"(den Vielvuzielen). Above them is the caste of those who give orders, of guardians of the law, of warriors. At the summit is the king, “the highest image of the warrior, judge, and guardian of the law.” Compared to the “supermen” all of them are auxiliaries, they are employed in the “rude tasks of domination: they serve to transmit to the mass of slaves “the will of the legislators.” Finally, the highest caste is that of “masters, of “creators of values,” of “legislators,” of “supermen.” They inspire the activity of the entire social organism. They will play on earth the same role that God, according to the Christian faith, plays in the universe.

	Thus even the “labor” of leadership falls not on superior beings, but only on the most elevated among the inferior. As concerns the “chosen,” the supermen,” freed of all social and moral obligations they lead a life full of adventure, happiness, and joy: “Given that I live, “ says Nietzsche, “ I want life to overflow, that it be in me and outside me as prodigal, as luxurious as possible.”

	It is a question, above, of the cult of suffering – meaning physical suffering – which no devotion on the part of the slaves can spare the superman. As concerns the suffering tied to social disturbances, the superman, of course, must be absolutely freed from them. If there remains one mandatory task for the superman, (and this only for the superman im Werden – in the process of becoming) it is that of perfecting himself, which means the elimination of all that might resemble pity. The superman “falls if he allows himself to be dominated by feelings of pity, regret, and sympathy.” According to the former “table of values” pity is a virtue; Nietzsche considers it the greatest temptation and the most frightful danger. The “gravest sin” according to Zarathustra, the most horrible of misfortunes, is pity. If he feels anything for the unfortunate, if he is touched at the sight of sorrow, his destiny has come to an end: he is vanquished, his name must be crossed from the list of the caste of “masters.” “Everywhere, Zarathustra says, “there resounds the voice of those to whom it is indispensable that death be preached, or eternal life, [he says with an honest cynicism]; which of them is if of no importance to me as long as they disappear (dahinfahren) as quickly as possible.”

	Before arriving at the elaboration of his positive ideal, Nietzsche had to submit the dominant social norms in the realms of the state, law and especially morality to criticism. He judged it useful to “re-evaluate all values.” In appearance, what limitless radicalism, what a daring revolutionary idea. Riehl says that “until him no one had analyzed moral values; no one had criticized moral principles.” Riehl’s opinion isn’t isolated, which, it must be said, doesn’t prevent it from being perfectly superficial. More than once humanity has felt the need for a fundamental revision of its ethics, and many thinkers have accomplished this work in more radical and profound a fashion than Nietzsche. If there is something original in his system it’s not the transvaluation of values in itself, but rather the point of view that is at its origin: the will to power, which is at the base of the aspirations, demands, and desires of the superman. This is the criterion for the evaluation of the past, the present, and the future. But even this is of a doubtful originality. Nietzsche himself writes that in his research into the moralities that dominated in the past and dominate today he encountered two fundamental tendencies: the master’s morality and the slave’s morality. The master’s morality serves as the basis for the conduct of the superman. This dual character of morality traverses the history of humanity like a red thread, and it isn’t Nietzsche who discovered it. 

	“It is for you to believe and to serve, Zarathustra reminded us, addressing those whose number is too great. The higher caste is that of the “masters, the “creators of values.” For the masters and for them alone, the morality of the superman was created. What novelty, no? Even the landlords during the time of serfdom, who knew little about this subject, knew that there exist people who have blue blood and others who don’t[12] and that what is necessary for one group is reprehensible in the others. Thus they knew, according to the words of the brilliant satirist, that “it was not fitting for a noble to occupy himself with commerce, to have a profession, and to blow his nose without the assistance of a handkerchief, but that it was not inappropriate to gamble an entire village at a game of cards or to trade young Arichka for a hunting dog; that it wasn’t proper for a peasant to shave his beard, to drink tea, and to wear boots, but it wasn’t improper to exchange a thousand versts of land for a letter of Matriona Ivanovna to Avdotia Vassilievna in which Matriona Ivanovna wishes her friend a good holiday and announces that thanks to God she feels fine” (Satiry v prose)[13]

	...In our literature Gorky and Nietzsche have often been compared. At first sight such a comparison might seem strange: what can the bard of the humiliated and offended, of the least of the least, have in common with the apostle of the superman? To be sure the difference is enormous, but the relationship between the two is much closer than one would at first believe.

	...Nietzsche became the ideologue of a group living like a bird of prey at the expense of society, but under conditions more fortunate than those of the miserable lumpenproletariat: they are a parasitenproletariat of a higher caliber. The composition of this group in contemporary society is quite heterogeneous and fluid even given the extreme complexity and diversity of relationships within the bourgeois regime. But what ties together all the disparate members of the social order of bourgeois chivalry is the open and at the same time (as a general rule, of course) unpunished pillage on an immense scale of the goods of consumption without any (we insist on stressing this) methodical participation in the organized process of production and distribution.

	...However, it is not superfluous to remark that certain purely bourgeois ideologues have developed ideas in many ways close to those of Nietzsche; for example, one of the best known bourgeois thinkers, the English oracle Herbert Spencer.[16] We find in him the same contempt for the masses (though with more moderation), the same praise for struggle as an instrument of progress, the same protest against assistance for the weak, who supposedly perish through their own fault. 

	...This is not the case with Nietzsche. He contests all the norms of the society around him. All the virtues of the philistines disgust him. For him the average bourgeois is a weak being, every bit as much so as the proletarian. And this is quite natural. The average bourgeois is a reasonable individual; he nibbles slowly, in accordance with the system, accompanying himself with emotional phrases, moralizing sermons, and sentimental declarations on the sacred mission of labor. A bourgeois superman does not at all act like this: he grasps, he takes, he pillages, he eats everything down to the bone and he adds: “There’s nothing more to be said."[17] 


I guess he was saying Nietzche was burgiose


	...It is time to conclude, all the more so because our study has gone on far longer than foreseen. We obviously make no claim to an exhaustive critique of the fantastic creations of Frederick Nietzsche, philosopher in poetry and poet in philosophy. This is impossible within the framework of a few newspaper articles. We only wanted to describe in broad strokes the social base which has shown itself to be capable of giving birth to Nietzscheism, not as a philosophical system contained in a certain number of volumes and for the most part explicable by the individual particularities of its author, but rather as a social current attracting particular attention because we are dealing with a current of the present time. It seemed to us to be all the more indispensable to bring Nietzscheism down from the literary and philosophical heights to the purely earthly basis of social relations because a strictly ideological attitude, conditioned by subjective reactions of sympathy or antipathy for the moral and other theses of Nietzsche, results in nothing good. Mr. Andreyevich[28] gave us a recent example in giving himself over to excesses of hysteria in the columns of Jizn.

	It would certainly not be difficult to unearth in Nietzsche’s voluminous works a few pages which, outside their context, might serve to illustrate any preconceived thesis, particularly within the framework of a global exegesis which, parenthetically, would be quite useful to the works of Nietzsche, which are more obscure than profound. This is what the anarchists of Western Europe did, who hastened to consider Nietzsche one of them and who received a cruel rebuff: the philosopher of the master’s morality rejected them with all the rudeness he was capable of. It is clear to the reader, we hope, that we find sterile such a literary and textual attitude towards the writings rich in paradoxes of the recently deceased German thinker, whose aphorisms are often contradictory and in general allow for dozens of interpretations. The natural road towards a correct clarification of Nietzschean philosophy is the analysis of the social base that gave birth to this complex product. The present article strove to carry out an analysis of this kind. The base revealed itself to be rotten, pernicious, and poisoned. From which this conclusion: let them invite us as much as they want to dive in all confidence into Nietzscheism, to breathe deeply in his works the fresh air of proud individualism. We will not answer these appeals and, without fearing facile reproaches of narrowness and exclusivism, will reply with skepticism the way Nathaniel did in the gospel: “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?” 


I guess he's saying its time to stop reading Nietzche


https://www.marxists.org/archive/tucker/1914/nietzsche-war.htm

Benjmain Tucker writes to Schum saying maybe Neitzche responsible for WWI and had influence in military policy of Germany



https://www.marxists.org/archive/serge/1917/12/nietzsche.htm


in 1917 Victor Serge writes that Neitszche has mislead us and is actually our true enemy


https://www.marxists.org/archive/kamenka/1962/ethical-foundations/ch16.htm
	Lunacharsky and Volsky, as G. L. Kline points out,[119] drew heavily on the work and ideals of Nietzsche, explicitly rejecting any conception of moral obligation and upholding the individual as a free creator of values and ideals. Moral indoctrination, Lunacharsky writes,[120] can generate nothing but slaves. The new social order will emancipate man completely, establish the individual’s right to be guided in his life solely by his own desires.


I think they hate that people keep calling them out for being assholes so they made up all this heady theory to justify their behavior



https://www.marxists.org/archive/london/eden/part7.htm
	“Nietzsche was right. I won’t take the time to tell you who Nietzsche was, but he was right. The world belongs to the strong—to the strong who are noble as well and who do not wallow in the swine-trough of trade and exchange. The world belongs to the true nobleman, to the great blond beasts, to the noncompromisers, to the ‘yes-sayers.’ And they will eat you up, you socialists—who are afraid of socialism and who think yourselves individualists. Your slave-morality of the meek and lowly will never save you.—Oh, it’s all Greek, I know, and I won’t bother you any more with it. But remember one thing. There aren’t half a dozen individualists in Oakland, but Martin Eden is one of them.”


can see what they meant about Jack London


Kautsky on dealing with the fact that the "intellectuals" hated the proletariat but needed to work with them:


https://www.marxists.org/archive/kautsky/1903/xx/int-work.htm
	Part of the very problem which once again so keenly preoccupies our attention is the antagonism between the intellectuals and the proletariat.

	My colleagues will for the most part wax indignant at my admission of this antagonism. But it actually exists, and as in other cases, it would be a most inexpedient tactic to try to cope with this fact by ignoring it.

	This antagonism is a social one, it relates to classes and not individuals. An individual intellectual, like an individual capitalist, may join the proletariat in its class struggle. When he does, he changes his character too. It is not of this type of intellectual, who is still an exception among his fellows, that we shall deal with in the following lines. Unless otherwise indicated I shall use the word intellectual to mean only the common run of intellectual. who take the standpoint of bourgeois society and who are characteristic of intellectuals as a whole, who stand in a certain antagonism to the proletariat.

This antagonism differs, however, from the antagonism between labour and capital. An intellectual is not a capitalist. True, his standard of life is bourgeois and he must maintain it if he is not to become a pauper; but at the same time he has to sell the product of his labour, and frequently his labour. power; and he is himself often enough exploited and humiliated by the capitalists. Hence the intellectual does not stand in any economic antagonism to the proletariat. But his status of life and his conditions of labour are not proletarian, and this gives rise to a certain antagonism in sentiments and ideas.

------


https://archive.org/stream/ModernTimes_305/42024947-19032115-Johnson-Paul-Modern-Times-the-World-From-the-Twenties-to-the-Nineties-Revised-Edition-Harper-Collins-1991_djvu.txt
	These 
ideas were taken up by a third Italian Marxist, Benito Mussolini, 
who was thirteen years younger than Lenin and just entering politics 
at this time. His father, a farrier and small property owner, was a 
socialist-anarchist; his mother a teacher. They filled him with a wide 
range of political philosophy, which included Nietzsche — he knew 
all about 'the will to power' - and he was much more broadly read 
than Lenin. But his political formation was fundamentally Marxist. 
Marx, he wrote, was 'the father and teacher'; he was 'the magni- 
ficent philosopher of working-class violence'. 30 But, like Lenin, he 
advocated the formation of 'vanguard minorities' which could 
'engage the sentiment, faith and will of irresolute masses'. 


Mussonlini into him



------


https://archive.org/stream/leon-trotskii-collected-writings-1938-1939/leon-trotskii-collected-writings-supplement-1934-1940_djvu.txt
	Dear Friends: 

	For the second time I have received a proposition from Mr. 
	Alfred O. Mendel, representative of Longmans, Green & Com- 
	pany, publishers, to give in 108 pages the condensation of Marx’s 
	thought in his own words together with a preface of 20 pages of 
	my own. As payment he proposes $500 for all rights. The idea of 
	making such a work is very attractive in itself but it is a 
	tremendous task. Marx’s style is condensed to the limit. To reduce 
	his thought as an economist, sociologist, historian, philosopher, 
	journalist, leader of the First International, 709 to 108 pages of 340 
	words to the page requires a great deal of time, if in general the 
	work is feasible. It is a bit astonishing that in this collection of 
	books “The Living Thoughts of Marx” has the same allotment as 
	Machiavelli, Montaigne, Loyola, and Napoleon. Condensing the 
	works of Napoleon to 100 pages is a matter of a week’s work and 
	Napoleon’s thought would not suffer very much. But with Marx 
	the question is very different. 

	I believe also that in the next period Marx will be more widely 
	read in the States than Montaigne or Loyola, even Nietzsche and 
	Spinoza. During the next ten years, thanks to the educational 
	work of crises, Marx will be one of the most widely read authors in 
	the United States. Such a condensation can become, and, if it is 
	well done, must become, a book with 100,000 readers. But the 
	book must be readable and I cannot imagine, I repeat, the 
	possibility to expound the dialectical materialism, the historical 
	materialism, the economic theories, and the revolutionary strat- 
	egy in Marx’s own words in 108 pages, and to summarize them 
	in 20 pages. It seems to me that the publisher should give two 
	volumes for Marx. The first volume could be devoted to the 
	general philosophical, historical, and revolutionary conceptions 
	of Marx with only a short reference to his most important work, 
	Capital. The second volume could be devoted to Capital itself. The 
	first volume would be more readable than the second and would 
	sell like ice cream. 

	In any case the proposed payment seems to me absolutely 
	inadequate, in view of the great difficulties of the work itself and 
	of the perspectives for the book. The $500 is not even sufficient as 
	an advance, and royalties must be based upon a permanent 
	percentage. 

	With the best greetings. 

	Yours, 

	Leon Trotsky 


Trotsky liked him?


------

https://books.google.com/books?id=f5cUEHHchNAC&pg=PA256&lpg=PA256
	CHAPTER 10

	Nietzchean roots of Stalinist culture

	Mikhail Agursky

	Although the USSR declared the total rejection of Nietzcheanism in 1933, when Hitler came to power, it was never truly abandoned there; internalized, it became an important under-current of Soviet culture. This chapter will treat the major tributaries of that undercurrent - the Nietzcheanism of certain Bolsheviks, Russian fellow-traveling writers, and Western writers, especially Jack London, showing how they converged in Stalinist Neitzscheanism.

	BOLSHEVIK NIETZSCHEANISM

	The formation of Russian Bolshevism coincided with the Nietzschean fever that infected Russians at the beginning of the century. Indeed, it can be claimed that the majority of Bolshevik intellectuals came under the influence of Nietzsche, an influence which varied only in intensity from one individual to another. Bogdanov and Lunacharsky, for instance, remained Nietzscheans after the Revolution and did their best to transmit their old Nietzschean values into the new society, implicitly or explicitly.

	...In 1928, in the introduction to M.G. Leiteisen's book Nietzsche and Finance Capital, Lunacharsky continued to claim that:

		there is an affinity between some of Nietzsche's judgments and conclusions and our own. This certainly explains why we, Marxist-Communists, paid some enthusiastic tribute to Nietzche in the dawn of our revolutionary movement ... While I personally have some reservations about the essence of Nietzche's social trends I pay him tribute for his struggle agianst Christianity, against petty Philistine morality with its rumination, its pacifist toothlessness ...


	...Lenin saw the typical Russian as a passive, inert creature with an inherent slave morality, the most sinister manifestation of which was


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anatoly_Lunacharsky

Lunarchsky head of ministry of propaganda


------


https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.80543/2015.80543.Benito-Mussolini-Memoirs-1942-1943_djvu.txt
	Mussolini, fresh from his over- 
throw, stakes a claim to enter into the permanent memories of 
Italy on the same footing as that gained by Napoleon Bonaparte 
in France. There are indications — and the fact may explain 
why Mussolini cannot claim to have been a good journalist — 
that like his favourite author Nietzsche he found points of 
similarity also between his career (as founder of Fascism) and 
that of the Founder of Christianity. 


Nietzche Mussonlini's favorite author


	...On the margin of this paper there is the following note in red 
	pencil : 

	A brainwave, B. 

	The only surprise was a gift from the Fiihrer, a splendid 
	complete edition of Nietzsche’s works in twenty-four volumes 
	with a signed dedication. A real marvel of German book- 
	production. 

	The Fiihrer's Gift 

	The gift was accompanied by a letter from Marshal Kesselring 
	which said : 

	Duce, 

	By order of the Fiihrer I send you, through the kind offices of 
	His Excellency Marshal Badoglio, a present from the Fiihrer for 
	your birthday. 

	The Fiihrer will consider himself happy if this great work of 
	German literature gives you a little pleasure, Duce, and if you 
	will consider it as an expression of the Fiihrer' s personal attachment 
	to you. 

	/ add my own personal respects. 

	Field-Marshal Kesselring. 

	G.H.Q. August 1th, 1943. 

	I had time to read the first four volumes containing Nietzsche’s 
	early poems — which were very beautiful — and his first philological 
	works on the Latin and Greek languages, which the German 
	thinker knew as well as his mother-tongue. 


Hitler gave him gift of Neitzsche books




-------


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1895/02/09/105976905.pdf

1895 first mention of Neitzche in search:

	...Three volumes, the work of Nietzsche, the celebrated German philosopher, who is insane, have been translated by Henry Albert, and are to be published in a few weeks.


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1896/08/23/103385650.pdf

1896 review of THus Spoke Zarathrusta saying Nieztche threw logic to the wind


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1897/12/11/117908656.html?pageNumber=37

1897 article Charles de Kay I guess trying to say Walt Whitman is like Nietzche but better


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1898/03/05/102107148.pdf

1898 article saying Nitezche now in madhouse but thought-provoking and puts some quotes in paper


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1898/09/25/102077923.html?pageNumber=21

weird short article on Netizche I guess saying he was too sexist (in title), but I guess quotes from him in body


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1898/12/10/102080895.pdf


1898 article translated from "M. Le Vicomte Robert D'Humieres in "Literature"" saying Rudyard Kipling a fine man and should be England's poet, but:


	...Here is a German kinsman: "Man is a being who wishes to surpass himself." This saying belongs to a man who by dint of going to the end of his thought has finished by going out of it, Friedrich Nietzsche. There exists truly a rhythm of minds, and I leave to the reader the task of verifying these agreements. Kipling, without warping the idea as far as Nietzche, has stopped at art, but he as followed the same road

	He has not passed that tragic stage of it where Zarathustra, in his ascent toward the light, lightened himself ot he torch of Pity.



https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1900/08/26/108279648.pdf

https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/1015.html

article day he dies, more positive about him



https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1900/08/30/108280458.pdf

4 days after he dies, short article:

	Nietzche's Unpublished Works.

	BERLIN, Aug, 29-THe late Prof. Friedrich Wilheim Nietzsche left fifty-one unpublished manuscripts. Arrangements are now being made to put them into print.



Sep 22 1900 Will Alden writes:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1900/09/22/105753280.pdf
	The death of Nietzsche has naturally attracted much attention, and both the dailies and the literary weeklies have devoted columns to the dead lunatic. Nobody denies that he said a good many striking things. It is true that most of them were false, but they were, nevertheless, stricking. But the man was a madman, and waht possible value attaches to the blasphemies of a mad athiest? To set up a man like Nietzsche as a philosopher whose words are worthy of serious attention is as preposterous as is the devil-worship which is practied in Paris by men who believe in neither God nor devil, but whose chief desire is vainly to try to shock the sense of decency which they once knew.



I guess Neitzche got some attention after death, people trying to make  him sound more legit? before articles in NY Times search at least would always add "and also he was crazy"


also wrote in diary of Marie Bashkirtseff in same "saturday review"


	...in her diary she exhibits herself as constantly posing, and that her diary is, therefore, not a true picture of its author. This does not seem to be conclusive reasoning. Of course her whole life was a pose in one sense, and if the diary had contradicted this it would not have been true. Her real life was wholly artificial. She posed because she could do nothing else. She was herself when she was posing, and she was most thoroughly genuine when she was most artificial.

	...Persons who knew her at Jullien's Art School tell me that she was exactly the sort of girl that her diary shows her to have been. They never fail to add that she was a decidedly unpleasant young person in her attitude toward her fellow-students. She must have been far from desirable as an acquaintance, although as a study she was certainly very interesting. But with all her selfishness, her envy, and her hysterical egotism, who of us who reads her diary can fail to have a kindly feeling toward her?


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marie_Bashkirtseff
	The diary

	From approximately the age of 13, Bashkirtseff kept a journal, and it is probably for this that she is most famous today. It has been called "a strikingly modern psychological self-portrait of a young, gifted mind,"[3] and her urgent prose, which occasionally breaks out into dialogue, remains extremely readable. She was multilingual and despite her self-involvement, was a keen observer with an acute ear for hypocrisy, so that her journal also offers a near-novelistic account of the late nineteenth century European bourgeoisie. A consistent theme throughout her journal is her deep desire to achieve fame, inflected by her increasing fear that her intermittent illnesses might turn out to be tuberculosis. 

	...British Prime Minister William Gladstone referred to her journal as "a book without a parallel,",[8] and another early admirer was George Bernard Shaw. It remained popular, eventually spinning off both plays and movies based on her life story, including The Affairs of Maupassant, directed by Henry Koster and released in the United States in 1938.[9] Her diary was cited as an inspiration by the American writer Mary MacLane, whose own shockingly confessional diary was written a bare generation later, and it was mentioned as a model by later writers who became known for their diaries, including Pierre Louÿs, Katherine Mansfield, and Anais Nin.[7]

	Her letters, consisting of her correspondence with the writer Guy de Maupassant (which she had begun under an assumed name) were first published in 1891.[1][5]


maybe they liked her cuz she was a sociopath

this could also be a good source of how a sociopath thinks


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1901/03/23/101071370.pdf

March 23 1901 article saying Neitzche's letters published and they like his style. One letter about Bismark, another about Wagner


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1901/08/17/119080240.pdf

Aug 17 1901 article saying Nietzche a prophet

	NIETZSCHE.

	The Prophet of Evolution, the Philosopher and Critic.*

	NIETZCHE as critic, philosopher, poet, and prophet is presented in a neat volume, the product of Thomas Common's scissors. The selections have been well made to present this mad philosopher and prophet of ethical evolution in his best light. Child of the stars Nietzche certainly was, with intellect rapier keen and that scientillated in the coruscations of genius. He appeals to intellectual men and women that are charmed by strenuous mentality and a literary style abounding in aphorisms.

	...Its slave morality that seeks to help the weak is the product of a gigantic conspiracy on the part of the ignoble and exception to preserve for themselves a place by drawing on the sympathies of the wise and great and good, that they may not perish utterly from the social fabric.

	...He seems to have a strange contempt for our common humanity or what is known as the masses in his aristocratic pride of intellect.

	...Inculcate such doctrines in the heads of the highly educted, the aristocracy of intellect, and work with them on the passions of the ignorant, and what will come out of it? Anarchy and broken heads. And this was just wat Carlyle saw would result from Froude's doctrine that nothing is good or bad except as thinking makes it s.

	...But what if ethical evolution is not true? What if the morality of the New Testament is not decadent? What if God is not dead? The seat of authority then remains in a personal will, not in a blind force or an eyeless principle. If Nietzche's world could be ushered in at once, the hell of that hyena, as he calls Dante, would be a refuge from its formless, palpitating horrors.


seems to not like the book



short article christmas 1902:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1902/12/25/118489522.pdf
	...says today ... that the Crown Prince beat his wife. The paper adds


	...It is learned from other sources that the Crown Prince loved to torment his wife. Among the authors forbidden her were Tolstoi, Zola, and Nietzsche. One day the Crown Prince saw her reading one of Nietzsche's works and he jerked the book out of her hands and tore it to pieces.


Feb 21 1903:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1903/02/21/101307286.pdf
	Nietzsche's Works Defended.

	The New York Times Saturday Review of Books:

	Has Mr. Alden's residence in London, which usually exercises a broadening influence on even so brilliant a man's intellectual horizon, so befogged it that he can only see by the dim lights of the linkboys of literature?

	it is rather late in the day to characterize, as he does in last Saturday's New York Times Review of Books, the productions of Nietzsche as the writings of a "blasphemous lunatic," and it shows Mr. Alden's lack of knowledge of Nietzsche and his work when he says that "blasphemy and lunacy can be produced at home, without going to German in search of them." Nietzsche being, as is well know to his readers, the least German of writers of German. Nietzsche is a world power. He has made a stir in the intellectual world scarcely surpassed by that made by Kant, Schopenhauer, or Rousseau. These men were also called "blasphemous lunatics" by that smug-faced intellectual serenity that does not wish its complacent attitude toward tacit convention disturbed.

	We need "lunatics" like Nietzsche to arouse this somnolent world of ours occasionally. The "blasphemy" of yesterday becomes the leaven of the tolerance of tomorrow. Whoever, like Nietzsche, expresses, after a thorough assimilation of the knowledge of his day, honest opinions that he knows in advance will make him unpopular, and sacrifices health and even life, deserves the gratitude of his contemporaries. One must study Nietzsche to understand him. One must acquaint one's self with the beatifully unselfish life of this extraordinary man to fathom his message. To say that his "Zarathusra," "Joyful Science," and "Beyond Good and Evil" "have never by any possibility helped any man" is to run counter to the judgment of some truly eminent students of the philosophy of life in Europe and America who have not hesitated to set forth their appreciation in books, reviews, and theses.

	May the whole of his writings be brought out in English, so that he will be fairly judged by all who seek for suggestions for the betterment of mankind.

	PAUL J. SCHLICHT.


March 7 1903 article:


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1903/03/07/101977938.pdf
	FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

	His Philosophy of Social Life, of Morals, and of Human Progress Toward a Higher Ideal State.*

	Written for The New York Times Saturday Review of Books by

	C. R. MILLER.

	There must be thousands of Americans who have heard enough about Nietzsche to know that it is their duty to abhor him utterly as an atheist and dreadful pessimist. A few hundred possibly have come to terms of real acquaintance with him, and millions more have never heard of him at all. Fifteen years ago Nietzsche wrote, and it was among the last things he ever wrote, for a few days later the gathering shadows deepened into the midnight of insanity: "I have my readers everywhere, in Vianna, in St. Petersbur, in Capenhagan and Stockholm, in paris, in New York--I have them not in Europe's Flatland, Germany." And again: "I have given to the Germans the deepest books that thy at all possess--a sufficient reason why they should not understand a word of them." This petulant misjudgement has been reversed on appeal to the Germans themselves. They do read Nietzsche, they read him very much. Young Germany is enthusiastic about him, all the more enthusiastic probably because of the conspiracy of the universities and the philosophers to ignore him. Schopenhaur's contempt for the trammels of the schools and the theologies put him under the ban of a like conspiracy, equally futile. In the lengthening Nietzsche bibliography there is but one American title--Grace Neal Dolson's monograph in the Cornell Studies in Philosophy. But the bulletins of the German booksellers announce an average of a boook a month about him, mostly by Germans, now and then from the pens of French or Italian commentators. The list runs now nearly to a hundred volumes of analysis, exposition and commentary. 


says "conpsiracy" of German universities to ignore Nietzche around 1903 and before, made him popular, lots of Germans read him, not as much Americans

can see why that guy wondered if Nietzche started WWI


	...What was Nietzsche, what was his teaching, waht had he to offer to the minds of his fellow-men that they should give him so much of their attention?

	...he became about the boldest and freest champion the world has ever seen of the supreme right and duty of the individual to be the sufficient guide and judge of his own conduct. To be courageous, strong, and self-assertive, to prevail in those things that make for the advancement of self quite regardless of the inconvenience entailed upon weaker mortals--that is his highest morality. Of course a philosophy so daring, son inopportune, so shocking to humdrum minds, must have a justification. Self-gratification is not a justifying end of such cruel egoism, and nothing could be further from the intent of Nietzche's plan. It is the advancement of the race that is the great end and aim of all.


guess he likes Nietzche and his "plan"


	...The right understanding of Nietzsche demands, as M. Pierre Lasarre has justly said, rather "the perspicacity of the psychologist than the erudition of the philosopher." No one can understand him at all who has not come to a knowledge of these three fundamental conceptions everywhere present in his writings: The overman, that higher being toward whose development social progress tends; "slave morality," the application of those beliefs that men are equal, that the lowly must be lifted up, that we must sympathize with misfortune, and that altruism is a virtue, and self-deniable noble, beliefs of Jewish-Christian origin which he holds responsible for what he considered the false and backward-tending modern social system; and the doctrine of the eternal recurrence, which proclaims that the universe is bound by its own laws to repeat itself in an endless cycle, insomuch that conditions which are to-day must, down to the minutest particular, repeat themselves endlessly, and must all have existed an infinite number of times in the past.


	...Lichtenberger, perhaps the most satisfactory and enlightening of all the Nietzsche commentators, asks: "What is the overman, and how shall man give him birth?" He attempts a definition: "The state to which man will attain when he shall have renounced the present hierarchy of moral values, the Christian ideal, democratic or ascetic, that is accepted to-day in all modern Europe, and shall return to the standard of moral values acknowledged among the noble races, among the Masters who themselves create values which they recognize isntead of receiving them from without." Manifestly the individual cannot attain to this state; he can only help society, the human race, to advance toward it; his only part in it is the contribution he makes to the slow evolution of the higher type. But he ought to submit himself cheerfully to the sacrifices by which the general advance is helped, for in so doing he contributes to the deliverance of man out of his present degenerate condition, due to the prevailing slave-morality. We cannot advance toward the overman, whether he be a goal or only an inspiration, unless we heartily despise the existing social system and its slave morals.


I guess some Nietzcheites interpreted him as having big plans for society


	...Nietzsche dwelt much upon the double origin of the notion of good and evil. The powerful and dominant races held those things to be good which were for their advantage--forays, pillage, the subjection or destruction of the weaker races by any employment of ruse or force which accomplished the desired end. Good meant what was good fro them, and the idea of goodness was inherent in such words as noble, strong, courageous, beautiful, happy, successful; bad, on the other hand,  were all men and things weak, timid, lowly, that failed in their aims or let themselves be oppressed. This was the aristocratic aspect of morality. The weak races looked at the matter in just the other way. The acts of cruelty and oppression from which they suffered were bad, their terrible enemies, the strong races, were bad, it was bad to press down the lowly that the mighty mighty might prevail, and goodness was predicated of those acts that aided the weak to resist the strong, the helping of one's neighbor, sympathy and aid for the suffering, and the cultivation of a feeling of equality among men that inclidned them to stand up al together to resist and beat back the vandal oppressors. The morality of the masters and the morality of the slaves thus appear as two aspects of the same thing. The lowly men, the slaves, individually weaker but strong in union and numbers, prevailed over the masters and imposed their system of morals, their notions of good and evil, their religion, and their civilization upon Europe. This is Nietzche's "slave morality," the triumph of the weaker men, of the men who by Nature's decrees should have perished. It is the unfittest who have survived. The big, strong, warlike races, the powerful fellows who would have peopled the earth with a progency always advancing, through the practice of the aristocratic virtures, toward the ideal of the overman, have given place to nations of degenerates. The weakness and degeneracy of the civilized nations are Nature's penalty for the violation of her law of progress ever upward. "Slave morals" have turned back the hands of the clock. "Sympathy" thwarts, on the whole, in general, the law of development, which is the law of selection. It preserves what is ripe for extinction, it resists in favor of life's disinherited and condemned ones, it gives to life itself a gloomy and questionable aspect by the abundance of the ill-consituted of all kinds whom it maintains in life. One has dared to call sympathy a virtue. (in every superior morality it is regarded as a weakness.)


polishing Neitzche-up a bit in this article? don't think Neitzche ever said anything about sacrifice for the perfection of man (uncharacteristic of him), apparently hated Darwin (https://withalliamgod.wordpress.com/2013/08/02/nietzsches-rejection-of-darwinian-evolution/), don't see much about him talking about making humanity better with natural selection and mostly rags on morality for holding people back


he was more like anti-human:

https://www.gutenberg.org/files/19322/19322-h/19322-h.htm
	Very well, then! of that sort only are my readers, my true readers, my readers foreordained: of what account are the rest?—The rest are merely humanity.—One must make one’s self superior to humanity, in power, in loftiness of soul,—in contempt.

	Friedrich W. Nietzsche. 


https://www.gutenberg.org/files/4363/4363-h/4363-h.htm
	...Here, to be sure, we must put aside entirely the blundering psychology of former times, which could only teach with regard to cruelty that it originated at the sight of the suffering of OTHERS: there is an abundant, super-abundant enjoyment even in one's own suffering, in causing one's own suffering



could say this is like natural selection idea:


	...You want, if possible—and there is not a more foolish "if possible"—TO DO AWAY WITH SUFFERING; and we?—it really seems that WE would rather have it increased and made worse than it has ever been! Well-being, as you understand it—is certainly not a goal; it seems to us an END; a condition which at once renders man ludicrous and contemptible—and makes his destruction DESIRABLE! The discipline of suffering, of GREAT suffering—know ye not that it is only THIS discipline that has produced all the elevations of humanity hitherto? 



Neitzche's other works makes it clear he doesn't want to better man but "elite" class, reach "higher states" by "pathos of distance," "slaves" purpose to serve "nobles"

why is author white-washing Nietzche (a little)? have seen this in other writings, basically serial-killer types think they are superior beings, natural "predators" and deserve to repalace the rest of humanity on earth b/c of natural selection or something like that. Booth Williams probably believes this. Like Nietzche just really, really, hate non-psycopath people and want to try to kill them all. Probably why in support of global warming:


https://books.google.com/books?id=RD4rAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA94&lpg=PA94
	If climate changes were greater than we have assumed, emigration from the United States could increase. This option would, of course, be limited to the small proportion of the population, largely the wealthy and educated, who would be able to locate jobs in other countries or develop the contacts that would allow such moves to take place.



https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1903/03/07/101977938.pdf
	...The passage from "The Antichrist" proves the robust quality of Nietzche's courage. Christianity in his view is founded on the system of slave morality, is the embodiment of it. The revolt of the slave races against the old mighty races, with their master-morals, has imposed upon man the law of weakness, of retrogression, of decay. He can emancipate himself only by a second revolt, a revolt against the established system of slave morality, a revolt to establish the grand law of nature that the earth belongs to the mighty.


https://digitalcommons.lsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1018&context=prs_pubs


https://www.holybooks.com/wp-content/uploads/The-Gay-Science-by-Friedrich-Nietzsche.pdf
	That today's natural sciences have become so entangled with the Spinozistic dogma (most recently and crudely in Darwinism with its incredibly one-sided doctrine of 'the struggle for existence' -) is probably due to the descent of most natural scientists: in this regard they belong to 'the people', their ancestors were poor and lowly folks who knew all too intimately the difficulty of seraping by. English Darwinism exudes something like the stuffy air of English overpopula-tion, like the small people's smell of indigence and overcrowding. As a natural scientist, however, one should get out of one's human corner; and in nature, it is not distress which rules, but rather abundance, squandering -even to the point of absurdity. The struggle for survival is only an exception, a temporary restriction of the will to life; the great and small struggle revolves everywhere around preponderance, around growth and expansion, around power and in accordance with the will to power, which is  simply the will to life. 


sounds like author trying to add a social darwinist twist to Nietzche

probably bad news that not only whitewashing/promoting Nietzche, but expounding on his ideas and reinterpreting them


	...As a guide to the formation of belief it is plain that Nietzche is not a writer to be commended to eager youth. The reader of riper years and seasoned opinions will find in his writings some of his old thoughts better put than he is accustomed to putting them himself, and inumerable other thoughts new neough and awakening enough to furnish food for meditation. That is the value of Nietzche--to be thought about.

	C. R. Miller


author have epiphany reading Nietzche or soemthing?



July 18 1903 reviews book saying antisemitism big among German philsophers, names Neitzche as one of the big ones:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1903/07/18/118493952.html?pageNumber=18


June 10 1905 article on Nietzche in fiction:


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1905/06/10/101362091.pdf
	"A New Humanity; or, the Easter Island" is the ponderous English title of a translation of Adolf Wilbrandt's nove, "Die Oster-Insel," which the Lippincotts have just published. THe translation is sufficiently clear to carry the meaning of the German writer to the English reader, and for that much we must be thankful. It is certianly not a work of literary art, but that does not matter.

	...In "A new Humanity" Nietzche appears as Helmut Adler, an entusiats, possessed of a scheme for the improvement of the human race. Nietzche's arim, before his mind was impaired, seemed to be to improve (or to shock and startle) the human race merely by an astonishing if harmonious and artistic arrangement of inexpensive words. Wilbrandt makes his protagonist in some sort of man of action, or at least a dreamer with plans, intent not only on sighing for but actually on developing the superman. His idea is to go with a few well-selected followers to a far Eastern isle, strongly fortified and surrounded by mines connected with electric batteries, so as to keep away the unregenerate man, and tehre work for the rearing of a perfect race of a uniform type.

	However, Adler as a man of action is a failure. He loses his reason and dies, so that he, too, migth as well have passed his life in dremaing and writing.


kinda weird, wasn't what Nietzche was about mostly just wanted to get rid of morality

if you paint him like "he wanted to make man better" it puts a positive spin on him but pretty obvious he was just pissy about morality holding back sociopaths. Can be summed up as defense of aristocracts, subjigation, slavery, and not some heady project to improve mankind

can call it "improve mankind" in a sly way, if you take for granted that "improvement" would be class of amoral elite subjugating the rest of the world

	...The portrait of the philosopher has been harshly condemned in Germany by those who believe in the beneficence of Nietzche's philosophy. On the other hand, it suits those who think Nietzche's influence was pernicious.

	...The outcome of Wilbrandt's book is rather conventional. The dead Adler's daughter and her sweetheart decide that the island of perfection is to be found only in our own souls and that we must look there also for the superman who is to conquer the "ape-man" of these material days.


April 12 1906 article on Gorky and Mark Twain trying to raise funds for Russian revolution in America where Gorky says he likes Nietzche


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1906/04/12/101774018.pdf
	GORKY AND MARK TWAIN PLEAD FOR REVOLUTION
	Committee Formed to Raise Funds for Russian Freedom. TO ARM REVOLUTIONISTS " I Come to You a Beggar That Russia May Be Free," Says Gorky at A Club Dinner.
	The American auxiliary movement to aid the cause of freedom in Russia was launched last night at a dinner given at the Club A house, 3 Fifth Avenue, with Mark Twain and Maxim Gorky as the principal spokesmen. 


	...Gorky said that among English authors he admired Byron most, and among the French Gustave Flaubert and the elder Dumas. Among the Germans he registered his preference for Heine and Goethe among the poets, and Nietzsche and Schopenhauer among the philosophers.

	Gorky was asked what he thought of Kipling as a writer.

	"Kipling," he said, "Is a man of bone and blood. He is a great poet and a greater novelist. But he should not lend his pen to the support of an ephemeral imperialism, even though the imperialism of Great Britain is humane and the word there means something different from what it means with us. Kipling should sign the songs of the people."



Jan 4 1908 article "ANTI-MORALITY OF FR. NIETZSCHE" saying Neitzche overrated and weird taken seriously:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1908/01/04/104714020.pdf


article in same issue "Nietzsche's Morality" saying "If ever a writer has be a narrow margin escpaed the most undesirable lot of making himself ridiculous it is he (or she?) who has failed to attach a signature to the article called "Anti-Morality of Friedrich Nietzche" in the issue of Jan 4.

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1908/01/18/104715755.pdf

says must be too immature to grasp the greatness of Nietzche signed Alfred Rau



Nov 15 1908


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1908/11/15/104813086.html?pageNumber=47
	NIETZSCHE SELF-ANALYZED IN HIS "ECCE HOMO"
	Bernard Shaw's Original Attacks Christianity and Germany in a Book Which He Describes as the "Highest Superlative of Dynamite."
	TWENTY years after Friedrich Nietzsche's death a book of philosophical essays by him has been printed in Germany. It is entitled "Ecce Homo," and was written within a space of three weeks during the Autumn of 1888.


goes on about how Nietzche was charmingly satiricle and hates Germans


also a bit on Bernard shaw owing something to Nietzche


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1908/12/13/104773003.pdf
	...It seems that Shaw's plays plays provide excellent opportunities for sociological discussions at afternoon teas and that he has completely ousted Ibsen and Nietzche from their places in the affections of Parisians.

	...Then they talked on that time-honored subject, the resemblance of Shaw's ideas to those of Nietzche and Schopenhauer.

	"It is absurd," exclaimed Shaw, "to maintain that those two men have had any influence whatever on me. For instance, I notice that a tree is green, and I say so. Nietzche makes the same remark. Then all the critics bawl in chorus: 'That's in Nietzche; you have stolen from Nietzche the idea that a tree is green!'"



https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1910/01/17/104917089.html?pageNumber=2
	SUPER THOUGHTS ON THE SUPERMAN
	The Bernard Shaw Fellowship Spends a Pleasant Evening in Disagreement.
	They decided last night that the Superman was to be either a labor leader or a cosmopolitan humanitarian; that he either had been on previous occasions or was yet to appear; that Bernard Shaw invented him, or that he came by way or Schopenhauer or Nietzsche, and that maybe, after all, he wasn't or wouldn't be any one of these things, because the Superman is only a metaphysical entity.


maybe some names in here


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1910/01/22/105985050.pdf
	AN INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL ETHICS
	Prof. Peabody, in a New Book, Proposes a Substitute for Political Economy — Old Theories Superseded.
	STUDENTS of social problems who are offended by the cruelty of the orthodox laissez fairo theory, and are equally repelied by the sordid materialism of Socialism as an ethical remedy for the wrongs of society, can find in " The Approach to the Social Question " a stimulating suggestion of a possible substitute for both. Prof. Peabody writes with as keen a sympathy for suffering as any Marxist, but his sypathy includes also those whom the Marxists despise and oppose.


	...The inefficient have no rights which the strong are bound to respect, and there is no rational support for the docrtines of a living wage, or the allevation of the struggle for life. Hobbes and Nietzche are the prophets of this school.

	...But idealism dominates alike the maturity of men and of society, and the thesis of this inspiring book is that we are struggling toward that happy goal

	...He climbs the heights of moral decision, and finds pleasure by not seeking it.


probably Neitzche spread found in academia, universities, not primarily NY Times

Leopold and Loeb learned from Chicago university

I guess this guy Professor Peobody also incorporating

book "the approach to the social question"


https://books.google.com/books?id=V2FJAAAAIAAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q=Nietzche&f=false
pg 116

goes with social darwinist thing

	
	...Christianity, having taken the part of the weak against the strong, having subordinated the instincts which tend to preserve life, is--Nietzche teachers--"the One great curse, the One great inward corruption, the One great instinct of revenge, for which no weapon is venemous, candestine, subterranean, or *meah* enough;--the One ineradicable blot on human nature." "Do I counsel you to love your neighbor? I counsel you, rather, to shun your neighbor and to love those farthest away! Above the lover of neighbor stands the love of the distant and the future man."

	This unflinching Egoism, with its anticipation of an aristocracy of efficiency, cannot be lightly dismissed as the reckless extravagance of a diseased brain. it is, in fact, nothing less than a rigorous application to human life of the principle of natural selection. Are we essentially animals, contending in a struggle for existence, from which is to emerge a Master-race, or may it be maintained, as Huxley said, that "Social progress means a checking of the cosmic process at evey step, and the substitution for it of another which may be called the ethical process; the end of which is not the survival of those who may happen to be the fittest, in respect of the whole of the conditions which obtain, but of those who are ethically best"?


same problem with the NY Times article, trying to make Nietzche easier to swallow

thought being controversial "made people think?"

might be these guys just liked social darwinism and wanted to incorporate Nietzche into that


	...The philosophy of Nietzche, even more than that of Hobbes, is attractive by reason of its simplicity; but life is not so simple as it may seem. The determined effort to be a master in a world of slaves may have as disastrous an issue as the pathetic life of Nietzche himself. 

	...To the vast majority of believers the doctrine of Marx still carries the weight of final authority, and the insurgents in Germany have been repeatedly confronted by a doctrine of infallibilism, and by an inherited pride in the "science" of socialism. Yet it is not impossible that the destiny of the movement may be determined in the issue between an economic creed and moral idealism. If the Marxian infallibilism is to dominate other countires, as it has thus far prevailed in Germany, its cardinal doctrine of economic determinism may share the fate of


doesn't seem so bad


May 7 1910 article that Nietzche is in the air:


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1910/05/07/104932970.html?pageNumber=28
	WORKS OF FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
	A Critical Consideration of the German Philosopher, if Philosopher He Can be Called, Based Upon the New English Translation of His Works — Many Recent Nietzsche Volumes

	By DR. JOSEPH JACOBS

	NIETZSCHE is in the air. Whatever one reads or a speculative kind one is sure to come across the name of Nietzsche sooner or later. Even so commonplace and respectable a philosopher as Eucken, who earned a Nobel prize seemingly for his want of originality, goes out of his way to praise Nietzsche in his latest book. Shaw and Chesterton have each had to defend themselves from being imitators of the German philosopher, if philosopher we can call him. Sudermann and Strauss, Emperor William and his whole circle all show traces of his influence. Much of the Pragmatism of Prof. James bears auspicious resemblance to doctrine of Nietzche. And now comes a whole row of goodly volumes* translating into fairly readable English the voluminous works of this semi-sane sage, who died bereft of reason only ten years ago. Considering that neither Kant nor Hegel nor any of the other great German philosophers have had this compliment of a complete translation paid them, this phenomenon is indeed significant.


lists a bunch of names


also Kaiser William II apparently?


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1903/03/07/101977938.pdf
	Nobody in a place of authority and responsibility--unless it be Kaiser William II--could attempt an application of his doctrines without provoking the whole world to laughter.



https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1910/05/07/104932970.html?pageNumber=28
	...The word Superman and the idea connected with it is perhaps the conception most associated with the name of Nietzsche. Yet it is only a logical development of the application of Darwinism to morals. If out ethical principles are in process of development and only seem absolute and fixed by theological sanctions or social conventions, they must in future reach higher forms which will become


same social darwinism presentation


	...There was nothing snobbish about this view of Nietzche's. His aristocrat was not the modern noble. He must be strong, shapely, generous, and instinct with all the feelings of nobility. He was to be the born leader of men. This conception has had a deep influence upon German thought and feeling, especially on the German Emperor and his immediate entourage, who flattered themselves they corresponded to Nietzsche's ideal. Maximillian Harden's revelations have rather shattered this flattering assumption, but the assumption itself was  aremarkable testimony to the influence of Nietzsche.

	This notion of the Superman finds its highest expression in Nietzche's most characteristic work, "Thus Spake Zarathrustra," which forms the centre point for both his teaching and his literary career. This remarkable book, which Robert Mayer declares is the greatest production of German literature since Goethe's "Faust," is written in rythmical and symbolic prose, obviously imitated from the Old Testament, but with a force and vigor all its own.


didn't Netziche yell at poeple and tell tem not to read his books unless there were in special elite

says something that it got popular and people wrote about it like this


	...The genius also attempts to connect disparate ideas, but in his case the thoughts, though not connected together in ordinary men's minds, have a basis in reality. One can easily understand therefore how a genius like Nietzsche, accustomed to bring together the most inongruous thoughts owing to his insight into the nature of things, might, when his body and brain broke down, continue to connect incongruities.



https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1910/06/04/104937541.html?pageNumber=30


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1912/02/19/100518744.pdf
	PRAISES BYRON IN PULPIT.

	Poet's Magnificence and Courage Excuse His Profligacy, Says Powys.

	At St. Mark's-in-the-Bouwerie yesterday the afternoon service was supplemented with a talk by John Cowpr Powys of Oxford, wherein he exhorted his audience to admire Lord Byron, for the very reason that he was "so magnificent a profligate, so royal and warrior-like a villiain."

	"Indeed," cried Mr. Powys, whose lecture on "Byron, the Revolutionary Poet," was rather a dithyramb than a lecture, "spiritual beauty sits side by side with immorality full often, and, as our age and our democracy have shown us, morality can reside in the most lamentable ugliness. It is just because Byron was a royalist, just because he had the courage--and how many of us have?--to love a Countess, that we just bear him in our hearts in these days of cowardice and ugliness."

	According to Mr. Powys, the appeal of Byron is the merging in him of the spirit of youth and the spirit of aristocracy.

	"Like Nietzsche, Byron does not argue, he proclaims, he commands," he said. "This is the mood of the royalists and of little children."

	The lecturer explained that the blood of Douglas, mingled with the NOrman strains of the poet's wicked uncle, were sure to produce this startling phenomen.

	"For in Byron's double appeal," he went on, "to the proletariat and to the superman, this poet is unique in all literature. We have had poets who appealed to one or the other; here we have the double man, the aristocrat, the darling of the gods, who came down and led a popular cause for liberty. ANd when Byron left England and joined the men who were fighting for Greece, he was showing the greatest pride of all."


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1912/03/03/100522328.html?pageNumber=22
	THIS MAN WHO WOULD BE GOD
	Nietzsche's Autobiography Done Into English, and a Life by Paul Elmer More
	ONE may begin the perusal of the life of Nietzsche with a feeling of repulsion for the man," writes Paul Elmer More in his striking monograph* on the great pessimistic philosopher, "but one can scarcely lay it down without pity for his tragic failures and without something like admiration for his reckless devotion to ideas." 


July 14 1912 article being respectful of Nietzche but saying he was out of touch, failure, sexist:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1912/07/14/100542385.pdf


Sept 8 1912:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1912/09/08/100375551.html?pageNumber=42
	THE INFERIORITY OF SUPERMEN
	Good Poets My Know They Are Poets, but They Are Never So Certain as Bad Poets Are, Says G.K.C.
	I HAVE often heard and read, we have all often heard and read, such phrases as "the common herd," "the exceptional man," "a morality suitable to the multitude," "a morality not suitable to men of genius," "the superior intelligence has outgrown such conventions," and so on. 


	...It appears very extraordinary to me that nobody notices the practical weakness in this argument for the exceptional man being allowed an exceptional liberty. It is the simple fact (known, surely, to everyman in the world) that the individual most likely to claim the individual libery is the one who is a quite exceptional jackass.

	...One of the "Super-men" writes a long letter about the splendor of Nietzche and the contempibility of comomn things. He says, with entire solemnity, that the entertaining German sophist must not even be commpared with other great men of letters. "To suggest for a moment that he ranks with Dickens or Carlyle is absurd." So far, I qute agree. Nietzche could not have pictured anything like MR.s Wilfer; he had not the imagination. Neitzche could not...


elitism fight over Nietzche?


	..,.Nietzche was a great epigrammatist, and as such deserves praise and perusal. BUt to compare him to Carlyl or Dickens is like comparing a Chinese pyrotecnist to a Greek sculptor or a Venetian painter.


maybe some were thinking if you look down on Nietzche you could get people who look down on people to not follow  his plans to destroy the world

Nietzche wasn't really about logic or reason he was more like writing a fancy new way to look down on people


Aug 19 1913


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1913/08/19/100403799.pdf
	KILLS HIS FAMILY AND THEN HIMSELF

	Brooklyn Chef Slays His Sick Wife and Four Children in Their Beds.

	WORRIED OVER HER ILLNESS

	Feared Dark Future for Children--Great Writers Quoted in Defense of His Act

	Melancholy because his wife suffered from cancer, and fearful that his four children would not be properly equipped to meet the struggle for existence with-out her aid, Henry William Lake, a chef employed in a Brooklyn restaurant, shot and killed all five several days ago in their home at 26 Wyckoff Street and later shot himself. The wholesale tragedy was not discovered till yesterday, when the police broke into the flat, and there was then still a spark of life left in Lake's body, but he died inan hour in the Long Island College Hospital.

	Lake left a letter addressed to the Coroner, in which he gave his reason for the tragedy and quoted several famous philosophers and writers as a defense of his action.

	...Here is the letter to the Coroner:

		To the Coroner:

		I am tired of living. My wife is slowly dying, and our four children are small, delicate, and sure to get trampled on in the struggle of life. It is best for them to return to unconscious dust with their parents (See Schopenhauer, Essay on the Sufferings of the World, &c., &c.)

	...Quotes from Great Writers.

	Lake then gave a list of the names and ages of his wife and children. Following he quoted from Seneca, the Roman statesman and philosopher; Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nietzche, Schopenhauer, and Saltus. The passages he wrote out were all concerened with reflections on death.

	...Lake was on the floor near the door, shot in the left temple, but he was still breathing. On the bed in the front parlor was Walter. He was shot through the head. In the rear parlor stretched on a bed lay Horace, also shot through the head.

	In a corner of the same room in a crumpled heap was the body of Estelle. It seemed as if she had made a struggle for her life. Her head rested on her knees, which were drawn up, and she was shot in the abdomen and head.


"struggle for life"



November 16, 1913:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1913/11/16/100661668.pdf
	NIETZSCHE

	Mr. Hill's Appreciation of his Philosophy

	The manuscript of this volume the author tells us in his preface, was finished in 1905, since which date much has been written about Nietzsche, but nevertheless the volume before us is a contribution of considerable value to the literature of the subject. ...Part II deals with more difficult aspects of Nietzche's system dealing with will, the relation of master and slave, and the now familiar doctrine of the superman.

	...Later we are told:

		Nietzche is an artist, and as an artist he sees life as a manifestation of beauty


	...Nietzche has carried the conception of natural selection and the survival of the fittest further than any other thinker, says Mr. Chatteron-Hill


December 7, 1913

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1913/12/07/100290881.pdf
	PROF. EUCKEN'S REVOLT

	His System of Philosophy Opposed to Some of the Prevailing Tendencies in Modern THought

	The philosophy of Prof. Rudolf Eucken gains its great significance from the fact that it opposes the prevaling thought of its time. At the outset, it came to a world ego-mad; a wolrd obsessed by the doctrines of Nietzsche, of Stirner, and a host of other prophets of individualism

	...The current of disintegration into which all old beliefs are being swept has, in reaction, produced such men as Eucken and Bergson, whos philsophy is addressed to the revaluation of some of the very beliefs we are casting away. ...but what is this but a restatement of the philosophy of Christ? Eucken's philsophy, while less magnetic and moving in style than that of Bergson, is even more definitely a return to the spiritual valuation of life. Religious morality, not in the institutional nor theological sense, but in the sense of a personal, vital realization of an immanent Spirit, is, in the teaching of Eucken, the only true and adequate morality.

	JESSIE B. RITTENHOUSE.


November 15, 1914

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1914/11/15/104637807.pdf
	COMMON SENSE ABOUT THE WAR

	An Amazing Article Written for The New York Times

	By George Bernard Shaw

	"Let a European war break out--the war, perhaps, between the Triple Alliance and the Triple Entente, which so many journalists and politicians in England and Germany contemplate with criminal levity. If the combatants prove to be equally balanced, it may, after the first battles, smoulder on for thirty years. What will be the population of London, or Manchester, or Chennitz, or Bremen, or Milan, at the end of it?" ("The Great Society," by Graham Wallas. June 1914.)

	The Time has now come to pluck up courage and being to talk and write soberly about the war. At first the mere horror of it stunned the more thoughtful of us; and even now only those who are not in actual contact with or bereaved relation to its heartbreaking wreckage can think sanely about it, or endure to hear others discuss it coolly.

	...No doubt the heroic remedy for this tragic misunderstanding is that both armies should shoot their officers and go home to gather in their harvests in the villages and make a revolution in the towns

	...And what our Militarists said our Junkers echoed; and our Junker diplomatists played for. Te story of how they manoevred to hem Germany and Austria in with an Angla-Franco-Russian bomination will be found told with soldierly directness and with the proud candor of a man who can see things form his own side only in the article by Lord Roberts in the current number of The Hibbert Journal (October 1914). There you shall see also, after the usual nonsense about Nietzsche, the vision of "British administrators bearing the White Man's Burden," of "young men, fresh from the public schools of Britain, coming eagerly forward to carry on the high traditions of Imperial Britain in each new dependency which comes under our care," of "our fitness as an Imperial race," of "a great task commited to use by Providence," of "the will to conquer that has never failed us"

	...but enough is enough. You can durchhauen your way out of the frying pan, but only into the fire. Better take Nietzsche's brave advice, and make it your point of honour to "live dangerously." History shews that it is often the way to live long.

	...It was Mr. H. G. Wells who at the critical moment spoke with the nation's voice. When he uttered his electric outburst of wrath against "this drilling, trampling foolery in the heart of Europe" he gave expression to the pent-up axasperation of years of smouldering revolt against swank and domineer, guff and bugaboo, calling itself blood and iron, and mailed first, and God and conscience and anything else that sounded superb. Like Nietzsche, we are "fed up" with the Kaiser's imprisonments of democratic journalists for Majestaetsbeleidigung (monarch disparagement), with his ancestors, and his mission, and his gospel of submission and obiedience for poor men, and of authority, tempered by duelling, for rich men.

	...Plutocracy makes for war because it offers prizes to Plutocrats: Socialism makes for peace because the interests it serves are international. So, as the Socialist side is the democratic side, we had better democratize our diplomacy if we desire peace.


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1915/01/24/301773072.html?pageNumber=52
	A NEW VIEW OF WHAT IMPELLED GERMANY TO WAR
	M. Maurice Millioud of the University of Lausanne, Switzerland, Analyzes the Forces Which Have Been Working There, Especially the Ideology of Caste.


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1915/07/18/104015173.html?pageNumber=24
	GERMAN SPIRIT DUE TO KANT, NOT NIETZSCHE
	Professor Dewey Traces Prussian Militarism Back to the Famous Philosopher of the Eighteenth Century and His Categorical Imperative GERMAN PHILOSOPHY AND POLITICS. By John Dewey, New York: Henry Holt & Co. $1.50.
	NOT Nietzsche but Immanuel Kant is responsible for the spirit of twentieth century German. Not belief in the superman but belief in the categorical imperative and the thing-in-itself has sent Germany to war with the world. Not "Thu Spake Zarathustra" but "The Critique of Pure Reason," explains the amazing utterances of Bernhardi, of Tresltschke, of Wilhelm himself. 


November 25, 1917:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1917/11/25/102378770.html?pageNumber=70
	German Philosophy Reverts to Brute Force
	Logical to a Certain Point, Its Fatal Flaw Is Rejection of Community Progress Which Constitutes Civilization
	WE are in war, but war is only a part of that in which we are involved; we are in a revolution of the moral, social, edu cational, and political systems of the great human race. 

	...Through the schools and through the universities the ideas of the German philosophers, of Nietzsche and of Treitschke, in particular, have created a state of mind peculiar to Germany. This state of mind, in which religious elements are combined with biologic concepts, is the result, in part, of the implantation of the seeds of Darwin's theory of the survival of the fittest, in the struggle for existence, upon the intensely religious German mind.

	The German adaption of Darwin's conception may be expressed as follows: In nature the strongest and the most clever species of animal is best adapted for existence, hence that species survives and its competitors perish. German philosophy assumes that, among the peoples of the earth, the Germans, collectively and individually, are the strongest and the most clever. They conclude, therefore, that the German people are the fittest to survive; and that they, therefore, have the right to exercise their higher survival qualities. IN the exercise of this right they conclude that they are entitled to take from other nations, by methods of peace or of war, their land, their wealth, their very existence itself, since this is the logical right of the fittest animal engaged in the struggle for survival. The German State philosophy not only assumes the right but holds it as duty to thus extend dominion by force over other people.

	...This idividualistic German reaction interferes with the progress of the human race just as the robber and the murderer interfere with local progress within the State. The individual is punished so that his neighbor may live. Unfit Germany must be punished so that the human race may life; that, through altruism, it may maintain and increase its fitness to occupy the earth.

	Now that German has put its State philosophy in the crucible, she finds that the world is against her. The nations are opposed to Germany for the same reason that the individuals of a community are opposed to a robber and a murderer. ...If Germany achieves her aim--that is, if Germany conquers the world--then Germany's philosophy of force will be imposed on the world. The men, the women, and the children of the world will then be governed by the State philosophy that one nation should propser by the labor of the people of another nation; they will be governed by the belief that this State, highly adapted to conquer others by force, should exercise that force to the advantage of themselves alone. They are the wolf--we the sheep.

	If the German philosophy should prevail, and, after the world was deluged in blood, broken, and impoverished, we should awake to find ourselves a part of such a State, what would happen?

	First, there would be no alien peoples, hence there would be no State left to plunder. Germany's Kultur would then be obliged to earn its own living. Her State philosophy would then meet its first fallacy.

	Again, when Germany has imposed her will upon the world, when she has achieved her super-Armageddon, when she has crushed to earth all opposition, then she will find herself without foes, without rivals. Without dangerous rivals the people of the State do not giv eup their will to the State. A military autocracy can be achieved only in the face of danger. Should Germany conquer all her enemies, she no less completely conquers the source of her own autocratic power. She would then be in the position of a cancer that had killed the body on which it fed. In what state, then, would the world find itself? TO what previous cycle of history would this correspond? Force is not the source of State power that can endure; it is raised only to fall.

	...We must conclude, therefore, that the German philosophers have been reasoning from false premises. This conclusion is supported not only by the tenets of religion and biology, but by history and by an examination of the sources of national strength--the fitness of other nations. History tells us that attempts to rule by force as against justice have always failed, either by awakening the self-protective reactions in many contemporary powerful nations, or when a people have been brutalized into submission by the degeneration of both the conqueror and the conquered. It will follow that whether the German State wins or loses this war, it stands to lose ultimately.

	...Viewed in this light, one may readily understand why the State philosophy of Germany has failed as a colonizer, and why, with their opposing individualistic philosophy, the liberal powers succeed as colonizers. Formal submission may be compelled, but the seeds of discord grow in the damp shade of hate.

	...If we expect to win we must meet discovery with discovery; we must meet loss with greater sacrifice; we just concentrate our business talent, our engineering talent, our medical talent, all our talents, on our battle line. Our universities and our laboratories must become our first line of trenches. Our universities should constitute the foundation of our national defense--our schools, the exponents of our creed of liberty.