http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/how-to-stop-an-asteroid-hitting-earth-would-people-cooperate-to-face-a-global-peril-10353951.html
	Earlier this year, while war and chaos continued to unfold further east, scientists gathered on the outskirts of Rome to discuss another sort of catastrophe. Astronomers and physicists from some of the world's top institutions grappled with a dire scenario: an asteroid up to 1,300ft in diameter – big enough to cause epochal damage – was hurtling towards Earth, and the countries likely to be hit included some of the poorest and most unstable in the world. Policymakers bickered over whether to try to blow it up or move it, and nations nearly went to war over whether deflecting it would make the fiery rock more likely to land on them…


this is one reason why active measures for increasing animosity between countries is important


	Relax. It was only a drill. Had it been a real emergency, you would have been instructed to kiss the world – or a large chunk of it – goodbye.

	...That question was the main topic of that mid-April meeting held in a conference hall in Rome. The European Space Agency had invited astronomers, physicists, nuclear engineers and mathematicians to discuss the slim possibility of a space rock smashing into Earth and causing regional damage or maybe even the end of civilization.

	Scientists today can tell us, with various degrees of certainty, that an object will smash into the planet in, say, 200 years, and they believe we can probably stop it. But nobody knows how people could or would cooperate to face a global peril – and in an age when many politicians deny climate change, can we even count on them to believe the hazard is real?


that's why active measures producing "muddled thinking" (as Starbird puts it) or politicizing an important issue so people are unable to reason about it are important. Global warming is a better example of this.


	...Chapman and Morrison gathered together a team, which concluded that the most dangerous asteroids were about one mile in diameter. Such a rock could have civilisation-ending effects, mainly because weather alterations would result in the starvation of billions of people.


that's one reason why making the food supply less efficient is important.

Might not feel any effects now, but once the planet is stressed that would come into play.


	....At the beginning of the game, participants learned that an asteroid, estimated to be somewhere between 460 and 1,300ft in diameter, was apparently on course to smash into Earth on 3 September 2022. They divided into three groups – national and international policymakers, the media and scientists – and played out over five days what humans might do.

	In the first year after the asteroid's discovery (days one and two), the participants heard that scientists had estimated a long "risk corridor" from south-east Asia to Turkey. As the asteroid moved through its orbit, the experts refined their predictions, homed in on its size and likely damage point, and advised policymakers on the options.

	By August 2019 (day four), the participants learnt global policymakers had agreed to fire six kinetic impactors, and they reached their target six months later. However, a debris cloud then prevented participants from knowing what had worked until January 2021 (day five), when it was announced that two of the six KIs had missed, one had hit and fractured the asteroid, and another had broken off a chunk that remained on a path towards Earth but was hidden from view by sunlight. Two others hit the remains of the now-broken asteroid, deflecting the largest piece of it.

	The following year (later on day five), the participants learnt that the broken fragment was still hurtling toward Earth and remained a significant hazard. It would arrive on time, somewhere in India, Bangladesh or Myanmar. And about a "month" before its impact, scientists were able to pinpoint the object's size (about 261ft in diameter), as well as the likely time (9am) and precise location (Dhaka, Bangladesh, population 15 million). They predicted that the explosion would release 18 megatons of energy: similar to that explosion in 1908 that flattened thousands of miles of Siberian forest.

	Chodas says: "The number one lesson I took away is that we need infrared, in-space telescopes to tell us more about the sizes of these objects." Johnson says that the exercise proved that humans can mount an asteroid response – and it can be affordable, a key element when trying to prevent disasters that might not occur in our lifetimes. ("A few hundred experts and a few hundred million dollars per year," he says.) The astronaut Russell "Rusty" Schweickart says: "I fear there's not enough of a collective survival instinct to really overcome the centrifugal political forces. That is, in a nutshell, the reason we'll get hit…"

	But the exercise ended on a cliffhanger, with a massive, flaming rock closing in on a teeming, impoverished Asian city. Having done the best they could, the planetary defenders hung up their hero lanyards, packed their suitcases, checked out of their hotels and headed for the airport, leaving the planet forewarned.


------


a lot of it is setting us up so that if a crisis happens, we're not prepared

basically end up fighting each other instead of working together to stop it

or get public at large to not understand it, so political leaders can get away with letting it slide

reduce food, water, basic necessities, so when it gets stressed more people fighting over resources, for themselves first

example:

during cold war, leaders in Soviet countries and China deliberately reduced their capacity to produce food, millions starved. They became reliant on food imports. So with that, the world is already stressed for food, can't respond to emergency

if asteroid lands at the same time or nuclear war starts nuclear winter, ability to produce food plummets even more, and all the problems set up before get even worse

Since it had been set up already that east and west hated each other, and now food scarse, and land that could produce food more valuable, it would be easier to get them to start wars for resources instead of share what's left, wasting even more of what's left.

it's same idea as active measures "preparing for the ground invasion"--by the time the catastrophe happens, the targets are too confused, apathetic, or too busy squabbling to know how to respond. 



------


http://www.businessinsider.com/global-warming-extinction-sea-levels-carbon-future-2017-6/#but-they-werent-the-only-ones-thousands-of-species-of-birds-mammals-and-insects-were-wiped-from-the-face-of-the-earth-13