

https://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2009/07/17/declassified-documents-reveal-kgb-spies-in-the-us
	Declassified Documents Reveal KGB Spies in the U.S.

	...Despite decades of FBI scrutiny, frenzied Red scares, blacklists, loyalty boards, and show trials aimed at ferreting out Communist infiltration, many, perhaps most, of those who acted in the service of the Soviet Union never had a Pumpkin Papers moment. But newly released documents from U.S. and Soviet archives show that hundreds of people, from the famous to the obscure, crossed paths with Soviet intelligence during the pre-World War II years. They include the country's most famous physicist, Robert Oppenheimer, novelist Ernest Hemingway, and civil servants like Hiss. There were journalists, too, like Walter Lippmann, I. F. Stone, and Bernard Redmont, a former correspondent for U.S. News who has been denying spying allegations for more than a half century.



https://books.google.com/books?id=qCAVQ_cdomcC&pg=PA179&lpg=PA179
	...Born Isidor Feinstein in Philadelphia in 1907 to Jewish immigrants from Russia, Stone dropped out of the University of Pennsylvania to become a journalist. After several years as the youngest editorial writer for a major metropolitan newspaper, the *Philadelphia Inquirer*, he moved to the *New York Post* with instructions from its owner, J. David Stern, to transform it into a champion of New Deal liberalism. ...In June 1933 he declared that a "Soviet America" was "the one way out that could make a real difference to the working classes"

	...I.F. Stone assisted in recruiting William Dodd Jr., as a KGB agent in 1936


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_E._Dodd,_Jr.
	William Edward Dodd, Jr. (Aug. 8, 1905 - Oct. 18, 1952) was an American political activist who ran unsuccessfully for Congress during the 1930s.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I._F._Stone#Venona_Project
	In 1995 the National Security Agency (NSA) published documents from the Venona Project (1943–80), a counter-intelligence program for the collection and decryption of KGB and GRU telegraph messages, collected from 1943 to 1980. On September 13, 1944, the KGB station in New York City transmitted a message to Moscow that Vladimir Pravdin, an NKVD officer working undercover as a reporter for TASS (the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union), had sought to communicate with a Soviet agent code-named BLIN, in Washington, DC, but that BLIN had been avoiding a meeting with Pravdin, claiming that his work schedule did not permit the requested meeting. He reported that Samuel Krafsur, an American NKVD agent codenamed IDE, who worked for TASS in the building that housed Stone's office, had tried to "sound him out, but BLIN did not react."

	...In their Cold War history, Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America (2000), John Earl Haynes and Harvey Klehr said that Stone was the Soviet secret agent BLIN. They cited four Venona cables that mentioned the American journalist I. F. Stone and that two of the cables contained evidence of Stone's pro–Soviet espionage. As well, the files of the KGB, from 1936 to 1939, indicate that Stone was a Soviet secret agent, who worked as a talent spotter, as a courier to other secret agents, and that he provided private and journalistic information to KGB, and Stone collaborated with the Communist Victor Perlo group, who gave him materials for use in journalistic exposés.


https://books.google.com/books?id=qCAVQ_cdomcC&pg=PA179&lpg=PA179
	...The KGB wanted to establish a covert relationship with Stone and was willing to pay him, but what exactly it had in mind was left unstated.


Stone was a KGB agent, but apparently didn't always want to stay in contact with their agents.

Good to use as an example of what confirmed propaganda by them looks like


------


http://www.ifstone.org/weekly/IFStonesWeekly-1969jul28.pdf
	I.F. Stone
	Jul 28, 1969

	Question For A Lunar Morning After

	The day men first stepped on the moon may prove a bad day for mankind. We have spent $30 billions on space; the Russians, a comparably burdensome amount. These are only down-payments. Now the competition to be first with a base on the moon, and then on Mars, begins and with it new fears and tensions. In the Senate debate on the ABM last week Symington quoted that premonitory remark by former Air Force Chief of Staff White, "Tomorrow those who control space will control the world." An arms race in space will put Hell in the heavens. While the earth decays, we will fill the skies with flying weaponry. That giant leap will soon land us in the Buck Rogers era; its puerile mentality and enormous cost will be a provocation to the desperate poor everywhere, while its gilded welfare rolls maintain a new crop of millionaires from Houston to San Diego. That tidal wave of TV banality on the moon landing turned an historic moment into a cosmic commercial, a planetary brainwash to keep their aero-space gravy train moving. It is still not too late to ask ourselves, "What if we let the Russians be first on Mars and we become the first on earth to wipe out poverty instead?"


stone often chooses masturbatory rhetoric over writing clearly

but I think this is saying:


	The day men first stepped on the moon may prove a bad day for mankind. We have spent $30 billions on space; the Russians, a comparably burdensome amount. These are only down-payments.

- the moon landing maybe isn't so great, as space exploration costs a lot of money for the U.S., and Russia too


	Now the competition to be first with a base on the moon, and then on Mars, begins and with it new fears and tensions. In the Senate debate on the ABM last week Symington quoted that premonitory remark by former Air Force Chief of Staff White, "Tomorrow those who control space will control the world." An arms race in space will put Hell in the heavens. While the earth decays, we will fill the skies with flying weaponry.

- While it's costing money, the "space race" will continue, and it will continue as a military conflict between the U.S. and Russia, with weapons being put in space.


	That giant leap will soon land us in the Buck Rogers era; its puerile mentality and enormous cost will be a provocation to the desperate poor everywhere, while its gilded welfare rolls maintain a new crop of millionaires from Houston to San Diego.

- The idea of a "Giant Leap for Mankind" and exploring space is part of a purile comic-book mentality that wastes money. The poor will suffer while space exploration companies make millions


	That tidal wave of TV banality on the moon landing turned an historic moment into a cosmic commercial, a planetary brainwash to keep their aero-space gravy train moving. It is still not too late to ask ourselves, "What if we let the Russians be first on Mars and we become the first on earth to wipe out poverty instead?"

- the excitement over the moon landing is just propaganda by the aeor-space industry to make money. We should be introspective and see if we have our priorities straight--[I guess] too focused on purile American "frontiersman" mentality to explore, too focused on beating the Russians to space, and all this is distracting from helping the poor.


kindof similar to the propaganda today. A lot of it is just calling attention to the cost of the space program (Achenbach does this a lot, so did Putin and his officials when cutting funding for Roscosmos).

He's basically saying "the space program will cost a lot of money and line pockets of tycoons/defense contractors/some boogeyman, and we could have spent that money on the poor." Seems recognizable as a template for attacks on space exploration.

I think it works as a propaganda technique because it opens-up a debate that probably nobody will ever win and could be applied to anything (why did I.F. Stone spend money on that new house instead of giving it to the poor?). It rests on assumption that space exploration is frivilous and wasteful without making a case why, and prompts readers to assume people who favor space exploration don't care about the poor and that it's a binary choice between the two. It might have the effect of making some of Stone's readers resent proponents of space-exploration.

Seems like a strategy to politicize space exploration, basically turn the left, communists against it.

Song "Whitey on the Moon" works similar way I think, basically tries to "politicize" space exploration along lines of black v. white. Also makes same case that money used on space program is wasteful, could have been used to lower taxes for the poor.


------


Stone writes on the Sputnik launch with more fanfare:

http://www.ifstone.org/weekly/IFStonesWeekly-1957oct14.pdf
	October 14, 1957

	A Terrifying Stranger Knocks at Heaven's Gate

	With the launching of the first artificial moon into the skies, man stands at last on the threshold of the universe. Outside takes on a new meaning. There new worlds beckon a new Columbus. The Infinite, on which mystics brooded, may become the playground of the astronaut and man roam where God is supposed to have presided.

	Like any other stranger, knocking at a new door, Man must nervously adjust his tie and give himself a quick once- over, hoping to make a good impression. The self-inventory is not reassuring. To a fresh eye at the outer world's window, the newcomer may seem a creature of terrifying habits.


still not completely sure what he's trying to say

but I guess he's hyping it up like some kind of biblical event

but he also paints space exploration as a generally bad thing in this article

looks like gist is "man is too violent to explore space"

section above summed up: we are entering a new era, but we may not be ready for it


	Only the Excuses Change

	Wherever man goes, he brings with him war. His poets glorify it. Each generation's healthiest youth is trained for it. Any difference within the human species is enough to serve as excuse for it. Religion, coloring, national jealousy, capital- ist competition for markets, deviations of dogma among com- munists—the excuses vary, the behavior remains the same. One may easily imagine the anxious debates of an inter- stellar conference called to consider the danger. What if men transplant their feuds, as Spaniards and Englishmen did after crossing the Atlantic? Theological gibberish was im- posed by fire and sword on the bewildered Indian. What if the Russians reach the far side of the moon and demand that its creatures eschew bourgeois ideas? What if we Americans, suspicious of uncommitted neutrals, land atom-armed on Mars and insist that the inhabitants adopt free enterprise? The human race may seem a pest which has suddenly ap- peared out of one small planet, making unsafe the highways among the stars.


I think he's saying we are too violent and would probably continue the U.S.-Soviet conflict in space

He says humans would be like a pest or highway robbers to the rest of the universe.


	A Heterogeneous Horde

	Were some flying saucer to land cosmic investigators for a closer look, they would be startled to find that mentally men live centuries apart. Here are men with modern instruments so fine they can plot the course of the most distant suns. Next door to them may live men who turn for guidance, in their daily newspapers, to horoscopes like those cast by Babylonian astrologers millennia earlier. Here walk men brooding on the new multi-dimensional geometries. Past them in the same streets walk others who cross themselves when they see a black cat. Some men seem the harbingers of a new race; others seem fresh from the cave. Little wonder that so heterogeneous a mass is swept from time to time by outbreaks of madness, from the St. Vitus dance of the Middle Ages to those furnaces into which some human beings shovelled sev- eral million others only yesterday. Ours may not seem a wholesome breed for stellar immigration.


He kindof sounds like Warmflash here. Saying that if an alien looked at us, he would find a lot of backwards and superstitious people as if they're "fresh from the cave." He says they might decide we're not a "wholesome breed" for exploring the stars.


	A gleaming metal ball hurtling regularly around our planet may be the first signal of intelligent life on earth to observers elsewhere who could not see into the murky depths of our aerial ocean. They might be surprised to learn that the minds which have made such wonders possible nowhere rule the human societies of which they are a part. Whatever the ostensible form of the society, everywhere the cunning gov- ern. Here the ruler may be a Tammany-style politician, there a Commissar. The finer minds everywhere are subordinate to the inferior.


Stone says aliens would be concerned that "finer minds" of scientists aren't running world, and instead mobsters, thugs, "the cunning" are.


	...The two contenders for mastery of the earth, the "commu- nistic" Russians and the "capitalistic" Americans have this in common. Their rulers equally distrust the "intellectual." The intellectual, like a special breed in a hive, is well fed so long as he devotes himself to the tasks allotted to him by his masters: the fabrication of new weapons, the inculcation of ideas to keep the human herd submissive. But let him begin to speak his mind, and he gets into trouble. At the least he may find himself deprived of livelihood; at the worst, he may be imprisoned as "subversive" or "counter-revolutionary." The intellectual on both sides is prized and yet suspect, fa- vored but subjected.


Stone says both U.S. and Russian are basically ran by sociopaths. Says sociopaths are in conflict with "the intellectual" (does Stone think of himself as an "intellectual" or a sociopath?), and intellectuals are being dragged into designing weapons and ways to keep people submissive for sociopaths intead of "speaking their mind."


	Mechanical Brains Preferred

	It is symptomatic that the foremost mind of our time, the man who found the magic formula that unlocked the atom, was exiled from his German homeland as racially inferior, and regarded in America, though with tolerance because of his greatness, as more than a little subversive, while in the Soviet Union his theory of relativity was taboo as "bourgeois." The rulers everywhere prefer mechanical brains.


Stone points to Einstein as evidence of his theory that "intellectuals" are being used and their ideas ignored by the "rulers" in Russia, the U.S. and everywhere, who I guess Stone is saying prefer people think less, with "mechanical brains."


	Objectively speaking, it would probably be better for the universe if man remained earthbound. In the wake of the first satellite, we give no sign of closing ranks and facing out- ward as a united species. There is no sudden sense of how petty has become all that once divided us. There is little reverent wonder for the adventures which could lie ahead. Instead there is intensified fear, and a demand to step up preparations for the next war, which must now be fought in the upper skies as well. Missile stocks are up. Nothing has changed but the magnitude of our potential for mass murder.


Stone says that this momentous moment hasn't united us, instead we are still divided with petty conflicts instead of thinking outward about how humanity could explore space. Says we are on track to continue foolish conflicts in space. "it would probably be better for the universe if man remained earthbound"


	As the sky fills with satellites and the sky platforms are manned and armed, will Americans and Russians shoot it out in the wild yonder, destroying each other and the world with them? It might be better, after all, if space were left to a newer species, bred to live in peace and to take joy in diversity. Our first reactions, like all our past, show how unfit men are for the heavens. We would only stain red the Milky Way.





------

Stone then proceeds to use the next three pages to fear-monger about how satellites are going to accelerate the arms race and double-down that satellites are actually military weapons:

http://www.ifstone.org/weekly/IFStonesWeekly-1957oct14.pdf
	4 Pages on That Soviet Moon
	Inside: Containment is Dead, The Satellite is the ICBM's Eye

	...Despite the talk on both sides about pure science, the secret of why the military of the U. S. and the U. S. S. R. are so interested in the Geophysical Year and in an artificial satellite is because they must have far more precise maps if they are to use the ICBM effectively.

	...Dr. John P. Hagen, director of Project Vanguard, the code name for this program, did his best to create the impression that the satel- lite program was of no particular military importance. But he did say it would provide a much more exact knowledge than map-makers now have.

	...The race for the satellite is a race to give the new ultimate weapon, the ICBM, the precise maps it requires.

	...The re- action here illuminates the bankruptcy of Washington, not because the Soviets "got there first"—our own satellites will soon be up there, too—but because there is so little evidence of any willingness to assess, and to adjust to, the new tech- nological realities. These were apparent before the satellite; the Soviet moon has merely put them into the headlines.

	...All the cliches which went with reliance on these obsolete monsters and the "situations of strength" they were supposed to embody have evaporated, though neither the President nor the Secretary of State seems prepared to face up to it. "Aerial inspection" ? The Russians will soon be doing it with satel- lites. Political conditions: the reunification of Germany on Western terms as a condition for an arms agreement? Germany, the central point in Dulles's thinking has been by- passed geographically and technologically.

	...The best guess here at the moment, however, is that the result of the satellite will not be a fresh start toward the peace which is now so urgent but the cheap and easy drift into a greater arms race than ever, with the Democratic oppo- sition making capital of popular anxiety and alarm.

	...Nor is the satellite proof of the superiority of socialism. Supremacy in military technology was not Marx's vision or Lenin's.

	...So we end this week's letter on a simple affirmation of faith. The Russians have themselves a shiny new weapon...


If he wants humanity to be less violent/fearful and "ready" to explore space, a lot of his writings don't help...

Otherwise, this comes off as a gimmick to get the anti-war types to oppose the space program.


------


http://www.ifstone.org/collectedifstone.pdf

	I.F. Stone
	Feburary 19, 1962

	The Mythology of the Anti-Missile Missile

	The Anti-Missile Missile, which has become the excuse for resumption of nuclear testing, may useful be examined from the standpoint of mythology, as a relic of belief in the supernatural. The anti-missile missile is only the latest of those ultimate weapons on which our hopes have rested for a military miracle, in this case for something like the invisible and impenetrable cloak which enables the hero in the fairy tale to emerge victoriously unscathed from amid enemy swords and lances. This belief in an ultimate magical weapon, like other superstitions, survives all demonstrations to the contrary.

	...We think of the anti-missile missile in terms of Buck Rogers. We see the tense comic strip panel in which our side (or theirs) says, "Their (or our) missiles are landing but our (or their) missiles have been halted in mid-flight by some mysterious new anti-missile device. There is nothing left to do but phone Krushchev (or Kennedy) to surrender. Capitalism (or communism) has conquered the world."

	This delusion reflects a faith in science which has nothing to do with a faith in the methods of experiment and reason. It is a faith in the magical potency of science, and thus little different from any primitive tribesman's belief in his witch doctor.

	...All this is worth a closer explanation because the business of arranging a meeting in mid-air between a missile and an anti-missile is more complex even than arranging a meeting of minds between the White House and the Kremlin. This is how you start to construct an anti-missile. You know the missile follows a fixed curve. Therefore once it rises far enough above the radar horizon to enable you to map the beginning of the curve, you can determine the rest of the curve. The problem is to build an electronic device capable of computing this in the few minutes available, and automatically aiming your anti-missile to some intermediate point on that curve where it can hit the oncoming enemy missile before it reaches your territory. It is, as had been said crudely, like hitting a bullet with a bullet.

	...Nobody knows whether this belongs in the realm of electronics or in Grimm's Fairy Tales as revised by General Dynamics.


Why did they oppose missile defense while raising paranoia/tension between nuclear powers?

https://pastebin.com/LmKBcbyx


doing similar things today: Russian gov has anti-missile defense, but instead of selling that to paranoid North Korea they help their nuclear program while opposing U.S. THAAD in south korea. Missile defense is generally panned in Russian propaganda--I guess that hasn't changed much since 1962.

You'd think having an anti-missile arms race instead of a missile arms race would shave a few minutes off the doomsday clock...


------


http://www.ifstone.org/weekly/IFStonesWeekly-1957oct14.pdf
	October 14, 1957

	A Terrifying Stranger Knocks at Heaven's Gate

	...A Heterogeneous Horde

	Were some flying saucer to land cosmic investigators for a closer look, they would be startled to find that mentally men live centuries apart. Here are men with modern instruments so fine they can plot the course of the most distant suns. Next door to them may live men who turn for guidance, in their daily newspapers, to horoscopes like those cast by Babylonian astrologers millennia earlier. Here walk men brooding on the new multi-dimensional geometries. Past them in the same streets walk others who cross themselves when they see a black cat. Some men seem the harbingers of a new race; others seem fresh from the cave. Little wonder that so heterogeneous a mass is swept from time to time by outbreaks of madness, from the St. Vitus dance of the Middle Ages to those furnaces into which some human beings shovelled sev- eral million others only yesterday. Ours may not seem a wholesome breed for stellar immigration.


https://web.archive.org/web/20151221133614/https://www.geneticliteracyproject.org/2015/07/22/a-rabbi-and-an-alien-walk-into-a-bar-what-happens-when-religious-leaders-meet-extraterrestrials/
	A rabbi and an alien walk into a bar: What happens when religious leaders meet extraterrestrials?

	David Warmflash

	*A single message from space will show that it is possible to live through technological adolescence…It is possible that the future of human civilization depends on the receipt of interstellar messages.*

	That famous quote comes from Carl Sagan in his article “The Quest for Extraterrestrial Intelligence”, published in Smithsonian magazine, May, 1978. It caused quite a kerfuffle. In the 1997 film Contact, based on Sagan’s 1985 novel about humanity getting its first proof of an extraterrestrial civilization in the form of an interstellar radio transmission, one of the characters says this:

    	*My coalition’s phone lines have been flooded with calls from concerned families, wondering if this message signifies the end of the world or the advent of the rapture. We feel that U.S. policy in this matter wants to be extremely conservative – if there’s any chance of danger or threat to our way of life perhaps the message and its contents should simply be disregarded.*

	Portrayed by actor Rob Lowe, the character is a social conservative political leader. The contrast with the enthusiastic scientist protagonist, Ellie Arroway, played by Jodie Foster, could be a good model for what might really happen if we do discover real evidence of an ET civilization during an era when our own civilization still looks something like it does today. Looking as it does today means having political and social groups that might welcome the news alongside other political and social groups that might rather not have confirmation that this little rock on which we live is not the only place in our galaxy that gave rise to sentient, technologically savvy beings — a galaxy containing billions of Earth-like planets, within a universe containing hundreds of billions of galaxies.

	Just considering the numbers should make anyone think that only extreme human arrogance, bordering on psychosis, could lead anyone to think seriously that we are the only creatures in the universe that got to this point, and that nobody else is ahead of us. But we’re isolated on our world, involved in our local problems, and, so far, nobody is talking to us.

	That perspective almost automatically brings up the topic of religion, and organized religion in particular, since the latter has set stories and explanations regarding how we got here and our place in the cosmos. Needless to say, Carl Sagan realized that the moment of first contact would put many aspects of society on a collision course with the future, but the religious component of society in particular will probably struggle with it, perhaps even put up resistance.

	...Given the gravity of the likely religious reaction to a successful SETI, astronomy professor David Weintraub of Vanderbilt University has investigated organized religions for writings and other communications that might be clues of how they would react to a first contact. He consulted and otherwise checked with leaders of more than two dozen major religions and came up with some interesting trends that could serve as a clue. For instance, on simply believing in the existence of intelligent extraterrestrials, the percentage of atheists saying yes is 55 percent.

	That seems low and suggests that even among atheists, 45 percent would be shocked to learn that we’re not alone. 

	...at least some elements of the world’s religions are ready, in their own minds at least, for the discovery of extraterrestrial beings. But that begs another question: Will the extraterrestrials be equally ready to deal with Earth’s religious leaders?



https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2017/07/28/views-religion-astrology-new-age-beliefs-hardwired/
	David Warmflash

	...The results showed genetic factors accounting for 40-50 percent of religious belief, as defined by the questions that were asked. Thus, the authors concluded that spirituality and faith are 40-50 percent inherited, meaning if all environmental factors are equal, twins have a 40-50 percent chance of having the same religious beliefs. It sounds impressive, but it’s really not, since it also implies a 50-60 percent chance that twins growing up in the same household will end up very different in terms of religion. One might stick to the beliefs of the particular organized religion of the family while the other grows up as an atheist.

	...In turns out that patterns in these genes relate to how susceptible one is to confirmation bias – the tendency to interpret new information (or to remember information) in a way that confirms one’s beliefs. Not only is confirmation bias strong in religious believers and those who believe in astrology, psychics, and other pseudosciences, but it’s also been shown to be largely independent of one’s educational level.

	Between the Millennial and Boomer generations is Generation X, whose members, like Millennials, also cling much less to traditional religion compared with older generations. Clearly, the basis of such dramatic changes in belief must be environmental (cultural and society) rather than genetic, and it could be that astrology and other “new age” beliefs are rapidly replacing traditional religious ideas.


Warmflash and Stone have similar ideas/attitudes

looking down on people who "cling" to superistition, religion, and say they are the reason we aren't yet "ready" to meet aliens or go to space.

Comes off as elitist

who are you to say humanity isn't mature enough to explore space?


https://web.archive.org/web/20151221133614/https://www.geneticliteracyproject.org/2015/07/22/a-rabbi-and-an-alien-walk-into-a-bar-what-happens-when-religious-leaders-meet-extraterrestrials/
	A gleaming metal ball hurtling regularly around our planet may be the first signal of intelligent life on earth to observers elsewhere who could not see into the murky depths of our aerial ocean. They might be surprised to learn that the minds which have made such wonders possible nowhere rule the human societies of which they are a part. Whatever the ostensible form of the society, everywhere the cunning gov- ern. Here the ruler may be a Tammany-style politician, there a Commissar. The finer minds everywhere are subordinate to the inferior.

	...The two contenders for mastery of the earth, the "commu- nistic" Russians and the "capitalistic" Americans have this in common. Their rulers equally distrust the "intellectual." The intellectual, like a special breed in a hive, is well fed so long as he devotes himself to the tasks allotted to him by his masters: the fabrication of new weapons, the inculcation of ideas to keep the human herd submissive. But let him begin to speak his mind, and he gets into trouble. At the least he may find himself deprived of livelihood; at the worst, he may be imprisoned as "subversive" or "counter-revolutionary." The intellectual on both sides is prized and yet suspect, fa- vored but subjected.

	Mechanical Brains Preferred

	It is symptomatic that the foremost mind of our time, the man who found the magic formula that unlocked the atom, was exiled from his German homeland as racially inferior, and regarded in America, though with tolerance because of his greatness, as more than a little subversive, while in the Soviet Union his theory of relativity was taboo as "bourgeois." The rulers everywhere prefer mechanical brains.

	Objectively speaking, it would probably be better for the universe if man remained earthbound. In the wake of the first satellite, we give no sign of closing ranks and facing out- ward as a united species. There is no sudden sense of how petty has become all that once divided us. There is little reverent wonder for the adventures which could lie ahead. Instead there is intensified fear, and a demand to step up preparations for the next war, which must now be fought in the upper skies as well. Missile stocks are up. Nothing has changed but the magnitude of our potential for mass murder.

	As the sky fills with satellites and the sky platforms are manned and armed, will Americans and Russians shoot it out in the wild yonder, destroying each other and the world with them? It might be better, after all, if space were left to a newer species, bred to live in peace and to take joy in diversity. Our first reactions, like all our past, show how unfit men are for the heavens. We would only stain red the Milky Way.



https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2017/04/28/alone-not-hasnt-anyone-dropped-earth-visit/
	Are we alone? If not, why hasn’t anyone dropped by Earth for a visit?
	David Warmflash

	...If only a fraction of civilizations survive technological adolescence, the Fermi Paradox still holds. This, in turn, raises another possibility, one that is just as simple as the “we are alone” solution, but it’s a lot more appealing. ETs could be aware of us and avoiding us on purpose. Perhaps, they are waiting to initiate a first contact until they think we are ready.

	If ETs exist, why have they not made contact with us?

	Surely, you can think of many possible reasons why we are not ready, but if our behavior is shameful perhaps the ETs recall a time in their own history when they were just as bad and their existence hung in the balance. They could be waiting for us to end war and religion and create a planetary government, or they might prefer to avoid interacting with us until that they have to, because we’re about to discover something that will lead us to them.


Stone and Warmflash say similar things here too: Stone says we're not ready because "intellectuals" don't rule the world and we're too violent. Warmflash says ETs might think we're in "social adolescence" and are "waiting for us to end war and religion and create a planetary government."


At the same time, they're putting in a lot of effort to increase violent and "muddled" thinking around the world:


https://www.hsdl.org/?view&did=768335
	Lunev also summarized other political influence efforts through alternative channels, beginning in the early years of the Stalin regime:

		Through my KGB and GRU contacts, I heard many stories of how Stalin and other leaders initiated many long -term efforts to undermine American society. Their main effort was to increase violence inside the United States, and their effort included paying selected Hollywood producers to produce violent and offensive films. The Soviet Union also provided financial support to the most aggressive and violent minority leaders. The Soviet Union always supported “agents of influence” who could either sway people to the Soviet point of view or cause general turmoil in the United States. 


https://medium.com/hci-design-at-uw/information-wars-a-window-into-the-alternative-media-ecosystem-a1347f32fd8f
	...So Many Conspiracy Theories: Crippled Epistemologies, Muddled Thinking, and the Fingerprints of a Disinformation Campaign

	...From another perspective, these properties of the alternative news ecosystem — the proliferation of many and even conflicting conspiracy theories and the deceptive appearance of source diversity — may reflect the intentional use of disinformation tactics. Though we often think of disinformation as being employed to convince us of a specific ideology, in a 2014 article titled “The Menace of Unreality”, Pomerantsev and Weiss describe how Russian disinformation strategies (which they trace back to Lenin) are designed not to convince but to confuse, to create “muddled thinking” within in society. Their strategic argument is that a society who learns it cannot trust information can be easily controlled. It is possible that the current media ecosystem — including the alternative media domains and the social media platforms that help spread links to these domains — is contributing to muddled thinking (a relative or effect perhaps of an crippled epistemology).


a little frustrating--they help make humanity more violent and crazy, then say we can't go to space because we're too violent and crazy.

Do they even believe what they're saying? Where did they get these ideas? It comes off as struggling to justify opposing space exploration.