https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francisco_Pizarro
	Reports of Peru's riches and Cortés's success in Mexico tantalized Pizarro. He undertook two expeditions to conquer the Incan Empire in 1524 and in 1526. Both failed as a result of native hostilities, bad weather and lack of provisions.


why was this guy so persistent?

	
	Pedro de los Ríos, the Governor of Panama, made an effort to recall Pizarro, but the conquistador resisted and remained in the south. In April 1528, he reached northern Peru and found the natives rich with precious metals. This discovery gave Pizarro the motivation to plan a third expedition to conquer the area. He returned to Panama to make arrangements, but the Governor refused to grant permission for the project. Pizarro returned to Spain to appeal directly to King Charles I. His plea was successful and he received not only a license for the proposed expedition, but also authority over any lands conquered during the venture. He was joined by family and friends and the expedition left Panama in 1530.


tried to conquer in 1524, 1526, ignored his boss and went over there in 1528. His boss in Panama didn't want him to conquer Peru so he went back to Spain and appealed to the King.

Pizarro died in fights between conquistadors after taking over their empire. Was he the one who started genocide or someone else?

	
	...The first attempt to explore western South America was undertaken in 1522 by Pascual de Andagoya. The native South Americans he encountered told him about a gold-rich territory called Virú, which was on a river called Pirú (later corrupted to Perú).[5]:24 These reports were related by the Spanish-Inca mestizo writer Garcilaso de la Vega in Comentarios Reales de los Incas (1609).

	Andagoya eventually established contact with several Native American curacas (chiefs), some of whom he later claimed were sorcerers and witches. Having reached as far as the San Juan River (part of the present boundary between Ecuador and Colombia) Andagoya fell ill and returned to Panama. He spread the news and stories about "Pirú" – a great land to the south rich with gold (the legendary El Dorado). These revelations, along with the accounts for Cortés' success in Mexico, caught the attention of Pizarro, prompting a series of expeditions to the south.


Andagoya talked to some south Americans, relayed stories about riches and "El Dorado" in Peru. Stories of riches and success of Cortez said to have motivated Pizarro to go on expeditions in Peru.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hern%C3%A1n_Cort%C3%A9s
	In 1541 Cortés returned to Spain, where he died six years later of natural causes but embittered.

	Because of the controversial undertakings of Cortés and the scarcity of reliable sources of information about him, it is difficult to describe his personality or motivations. Early lionizing of the conquistadors did not encourage deep examination of Cortés.


Did romantizication of Cortes (other conquistadors?) inspire Pizarro?

conquered Aztecs 1521, governor of Mexico 1521-1524 leading up to Pizarro expeditions

Cortes had a lot of plots against him, people tried to murder him, was brutal and sounds sort-of miserable


how conquistadors thought of themselves:


https://academicworks.cuny.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=https://www.google.com/&httpsredir=1&article=1018&context=qb_pubs
	...Next to a personal longing for richness, social advancement, or simply adventure , religion 9 was a possible reason for the actions of the conquistadors. However, whatever the reason might have been, the image of the Spanish who conquered the New World seemed to be impacted by all these factors. Due to this, we want to ask for the self-reception of the conquistadors. 

	...Men like Hernando de Soto (1496-1542) were able to gain uncountable success by seemingly easy means. With only 650 men, 240 horses and some harquebus muskets, he was able to gain victories 13 against pre-Columbian kingdoms and masses of enemies. De Soto’s case is also important because 14 he resembled “the quintessential conquistador – a fearless risk taker who relentlessly pursued wealth, fame and glory even when the odds seemed overwhelmingly against him.“ Like those who 15 followed his example and became successful, he was driven by ambitions and the wish for entitlement, while believing in “his own superiority as a Spaniard, a Christian and a warrior“. As well as 16 he commanded his soldiers, as brutal was his attitude against the indigenous people, who were seen as a sacrifice for his personal ambitions. However, he returned with nine ships to Spain, all carrying gold and silver, thereby driving the fantasies of a next generation of conquerors further.


de Soto set early example, "drove fantasies" of future conquistadores with image of fearless risk taker, getting wealth, fame, and glory, "easy victory" and showing "superiority as a Spaniard, a Christian and a Warrior"


	Despite his success, de Soto never achieved the fame of the “genius“ of all conquistadors, Hernán Cortés (1485-1547), who also provided a detailed account of his experiences in the New World. 

	Wanting to keep the king informed about his achievements as conquistador, he produced a report that was described as well written as Cesar’s description of the Gallic War. Cortés provided five reports , which, especially due to the lack of Indian counter-reports, were responsible for the crea 18 - tion of the historiographical image of the Conquista for far too long. Even though Cortés stated that he 

		will endeavor to describe, in the best manner in my power, what I have myself seen; and imperfectly as I may succeed in the attempt, I am fully aware that the account will appear so wonderful as to be deemed scarcely worthy of credit; since even we who have seen these things with our own eyes, are yet so amazed as to be unable to comprehend their reality. 19

	However, his perspective remained a Spanish one, criticizing the Indians for their disbelief in god, which forced the conquistador to say “everything to them I could to divert them from their idola - tries, and draw them to a knowledge of God our Lord.“ Cortés would also 

		make them understand the true faith, they would follow my directions, as being for the best. Afterwards, Moctezuma and many of the principal citizens remained with me until I had removed the idols, purified the chapels, and placed the images in them, manifesting apparent pleasure; and I forbade them sacrificing human beings to their idols as they had been accustomed to do; because, besides being abhorrent in the sight of God, your sacred Majesty had prohibited it by law, and commanded to put to death whoever should take the life of another. Thus, from that time, they refrained from the practice, and during the who - le period of my abode in that city, they were never seen to kill or sacrifice a human being. 21

	The conquistador described himself as a religious savior, a messiah who was sent to save the Indians from using unchristian practices during their spiritual festivities. However, he also strengthened the aspirations of further conquistadors when he describes the wealth of the Aztec Empire with all its gold and silver to show that nothing in Spain would be equal to the beauty and the luxuries of the New World, the world Cortés had made his own. 22


de Soto didn't achieve fame of Cortes, "genius" of conquistadors who wrote of his experiences. His report to king was influential and responsible for image of Conqista for a long time. He described himself as religious savior bringing Christianity to new world He also described wealth of Aztec empire which strengthened aspirations of future conquistadors.


	After sailing from Cuby to Mexico in 1519, he made his way through Montezuma’s empire to finally arrive in the Aztec capital, where he destroyed the existing system of rule, even though the con - quistador assured the king of the Aztecs that he and his men had come to “Mexico as friends. There is nothing to fear.“ While the indigenous population of Tenochtitlan was not sure if Cortés might 23 have been a god or a foreigner who would simply be a friend, they recognized too late the danger that was created by the arrival of the Spaniards in the capital. On the second day of a ritual festivity, 

		they began to sing again, but without warning they were all put to death. The dancers and singers were completely unarmed. They brought only their embroidered cloaks, their turquoises, their lip plugs, their necklaces, their clusters of heron feathers, their trinkets made of deer hooves. Those who played the drums, the old men, had brought their gourds of snuff and their timbrels. 

		The Spaniards attacked the musicians first, slashing at their hands and faces until they had killed all of them. The singers-and even the spectators- were also killed. This slaughter in the Sacred Patio went on for three hours. Then the Spaniards burst into the rooms of the temple to kill the others: those who were car - rying water, or bringing fodder for the horses, or grinding meal, or sweeping, or standing watch over this work. 24

	Due to their cruelty, the conquistadors were finally able to establish a new rule and create a new cultural sphere on the soil of the already declining American empires. They became an emblematic part of the Latin American myth and historiography in the same sense as the Conquista became 26 a determining factor of the New World in general, and states like Mexico, in particular. 


but Cortes was brutal and slaughtered many innocent Americans. Stories of his cruelty survived with his stories of glory.


did Cortes and his conquistadors have a reputation of brutality among the spanish too?


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massacre_in_the_Great_Temple_of_Tenochtitlan#The_Spaniards'_account_of_the_incident
	The Spaniards' account of the incident

	I don't know, but some say he had been warned that the Indian nobles of the city had assembled to plot the mutiny and the rebellion, which they later carried out; others, believe that [the Spaniards] went to watch them perform this famous and praised dance, and seeing how rich they were and wanting the gold the Indians were wearing, he [Alvarado] covered each of the entrances with ten or twelve Spaniards and went inside with more than fifty [Spaniards], and without remorse and lacking any Christian piety, they brutally stabbed and killed the Indians, and took what they were wearing.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francisco_L%C3%B3pez_de_G%C3%B3mara
	Francisco López de Gómara (c. 1511 - c. 1566) was a Spanish historian who worked in Seville, particularly noted for his works in which he described the early 16th century expedition undertaken by Hernán Cortés in the Spanish conquest of the New World. Although Gómara himself did not accompany Cortés, and had in fact never been to the Americas, he had firsthand access to Cortés and others of the returning conquistadores as the sources of his account. However other contemporaries, among them most notably Bernal Díaz del Castillo, criticised his work as being full of inaccuracies, and one which unjustifiably sanitised the events and aggrandised Cortés' role.


signs that later some in Spain were pissed about it:

	
	...Whether through the desire to aggrandize his patron, or through relying on the firsthand information which the latter gave him (Gómara was never in America) or from malice, or for some other reason Gómara fell into serious errors and in many instances sinned gravely against historical truth. It was perhaps for this reason that Prince Philip (afterwards Philip II of Spain), in a decree issued at Valladolid on November 17, 1553, ordered all the copies of his work that could be found to be gathered in and imposed a penalty of 200,000 maravedis on anyone who should reprint it.


could also point to people believing in Cortez accounts then realising bs later


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernal_D%C3%ADaz_del_Castillo

diaz published his account late, said to be in reaction to official account of cortes in spain, and others doing similar things. Might have been that "glorious" image of Cortes persisted for many years.


http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Hern%C3%A1n_Cort%C3%A9s
	In 1511, he accompanied Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar, an aide of the governor of Hispaniola, in his expedition to conquer Cuba. At the age of 26, Cortés was made clerk to the treasurer, with the responsibility of making sure the king of Spain got one-fifth of the profits from gold and slaves.

	...In 1514, Cortés led a group that wanted more natives for the settlers.

	...It was not until he had been almost 15 years in the West Indies that Cortés began to look beyond his substantial status as mayor of the capital of Cuba and man of affairs in the thriving colony.


was a slaver during 15 years in cuba, became mayor of capital

at some times there his boss was angry at him and got in fight with him for trifling with his sister in law

seems like there were a lot of opportunities for word to get out that Cortes was slimy



https://academicworks.cuny.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=https://www.google.com/&httpsredir=1&article=1018&context=qb_pubs
	However, 27 the conquistadors themselves were rather the incarnation of a medieval age that founded a new field of action in the New World, while they seemed to have no future in the old one of European Spain. The conquistador itself as an ideal image for bravery, manhood, and the fight against the Islamic occupation of Spain goes back until the early 13th century, as James I of Aragon (1208-1276) recei - ved the title El Conquistador after liberating Valencia from its Muslim conquerors. The term was 28 consequently used to describe men like James I, which is why it was common to understand that “el conquistador es el hombre que hizo reconocer por las armas, el derecho de España y de la Iglesia sobre las tierras que a partir de entonces formaron parte de la Corona española“ . Despite their no 29 - ble image, a minority of the conquistadors was part of the gentry. Of 1175 known men, just 69 were noblemen. However, many of them tried to achieve such a social status by a successful conquest, 30 for which the battles for the New World seemed to offer a last chance, as Granada, the last Muslim bastion was reconquered in 1492, the year Columbus was granted his attempt to reach East Asia by crossing the Atlantic.

	...Following the call to arms “for god and his majesty,“ they were fulfilling their task for religion and nation. While doing this, in 71 cases, the men were able to achieve a social advancement and a noble title.


Conquista of new world was like crusades in middle east

many of them wanted to achieve higher social status from conquest as in crusades

	
	...The conquistadors saw themselves as legitimated to do this not only by the power of the king but also by the fact that they were waging a “ guerra justa .“ Consequently, the use of violence was le 37 - gitimized whenever needed to achieve the aims of the Conquista, and cruelties were something 38 rather common. This was especially so during the periods after the Spanish conquest, when the so- 39 called ecomienda system created a high grade of suffering for the indigenous population, and vio 40 - lence as well as enslavement became part of the economic system of Latin and South America. 41 However, as we know today due to a more critical research with regard to the role of the native population for the success of the conquistadors, without indigenous support, the Spanish soldiers would have never been successful. Even though Cortés underlined the superiority of Western mili - tary, especially the cavalry , without native forces, he would not have been able to survive for long. 42 Despite the superior self-image of Western domination, the conquistadors did not change the ex 43 - isting social order of rule because most of the former hierarchies were simply used further by ex - changing the ruling class of the Aztecs with a foreign ruling class from Spain. During this process, 44 the “indigenous peoples now appear as pragmatic, flexible actors, creatively adjusting to the new conditions brought forth by the Europeans’ arrival, and even manipulating their supposed superiors.“ Cortés described that he and his men were often greeted very friendly by the natives , 45 46 who recognized the chance to overcome the Aztec rule of Tenochtitlan. The consequence of these friendly meetings was not only a cultural exchange , but many of them - and not only in Mexico - 47 were changing sides and entering the rows of the conquistadors. Despite these facts, the conquis 48 - tadors developed a self-image that was not related to the native support at all; rather, it was influ - enced by other factors, especially gold and religion.


conquistadors saw themselves as waging "just war" legitimized by the king. Cruelities were common and they enslaved many people. The conquest would not have been successful without civil war and defectors among South Americans, but conquistadors had a self-image where they emphasized their own superiority and military superiority. The image they relayed "was not related at all" to South American support and was instead related to gold and religion.

Did accounts Cortes and allies downplay use of divide-and-conquer tactics?

article goes on about image of quest for gold, holy war, and expanding Spanish empire


------

before all this, conquistadors were coming to New World and killing a lot of people:


https://www.thoughtco.com/biography-of-diego-velazquez-de-cuellar-2136515
	Conquest of Hispaniola and Cuba

	The colonists from the Second Voyage needed land and slaves, so they set about conquering and subjugating the unfortunate native population. Diego Velazquez was an active participant in the conquests first of Hispaniola, and then Cuba. In Hispaniola, he attached himself to Bartholomew Columbus, Christopher's brother, which lent him a certain prestige and helped get him established.

	He was already a rich man when Governor Nicolas de Ovando made him an officer in the conquest of Western Hispaniola. Ovando would later make Velazquez governor of the western settlements in Hispaniola. Velazquez played a key role in the Xaragua massacre in 1503 in which hundreds of unarmed Taino natives were slaughtered.

	With Hispaniola pacified, Velazquez led the expedition to subjugate the neighboring island of Cuba. In 1511, Velazquez took a force of over three hundred conquistadors and invaded Cuba. His chief lieutenant was an ambitious, tough conquistador named Panfilo de Narvaez. Within a couple of years, Velazquez, Narvaez and their men had pacified the island, enslaved all of the inhabitants and established several settlements. By 1518, Velazquez was lieutenant governor of the Spanish holdings in the Caribbean and for all intents and purposes the most important man in Cuba.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diego_Vel%C3%A1zquez_de_Cu%C3%A9llar
	He was named to lead the expedition of conquest of Cuba in 1511, with 300 men, a three-year undertaking noted for its brutality.[4]

	...Noting the weakness of the natives, Velázquez authorized the importation of black slaves in 1513. 

	...Velázquez lost his governorship of Cuba in 1521, for his misuse of indigenous labor, but he was restored to office in 1523.


https://www.thoughtco.com/biography-of-diego-velazquez-de-cuellar-2136515
	Cortes ignored his instructions and immediately set out on an audacious conquest of the mighty Mexica (Aztec) Empire. By November 1519, Cortes and his men were in Tenochtitlan, having fought their way inland, making allies with disgruntled Aztec vassal states as they did so. In July of 1519, Cortes had sent a ship back to Spain with some gold, but it made a stop in Cuba, and someone saw the loot. Velazquez was informed and swiftly realized that Cortes was trying to fool him once again.

	Velazquez mounted a massive expedition to head for the mainland and capture or kill Cortes and return command of the enterprise to himself.

	He placed his old lieutenant Panfilo de Narvaez in charge. In April of 1520, Narvaez landed near present-day Veracruz with over one thousand soldiers, nearly three times the total that Cortes had. Cortes soon realized what was going on and he marched to the coast with every man he could spare to fight Narvaez. On the night of May 28, Cortes attacked Narvaez and his men, dug in at the native town of Cempoala. In a short but vicious battle, Cortes defeated Narvaez. It was a coup for Cortes, because most of Narvaez' men (fewer than twenty had died in the fighting) joined him. Velazquez had unwittingly sent Cortes what he needed most: men, supplies and weapons. 

	...Although Cortes had clearly overstepped the bounds of the initial contract and had unceremoniously cut Velazquez out of the spoils, he had been circumspect about legal forms once he was on the mainland, communicating directly with the King. In 1522, a legal committee in Spain found in favor of Cortes. Cortes was ordered to pay back Velazquez his initial investment, but Velazquez missed out on his share of the spoils (which would have been vast) and was further ordered to undergo an investigation of his own activities in Cuba.

	Velazquez died in 1524 before the investigation could be concluded.



this is interesting:


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juan_Rodr%C3%ADguez_de_Fonseca
	Control of New Spain

	The sovereigns entrusted Rodríguez de Fonseca with building a colonial administration from as early as Columbus’ second voyage in 1493, which he organized. From that date he gained increasing influence over Castilian colonial policy and emerged as the kingdom’s de facto Minister of Colonial Affairs.[1][4]

	Rodríguez de Fonseca clashed early with Columbus who, he believed, was asserting too much independence from royal authority, and in 1499 Queen Isabella, influenced by him, removed Columbus as governor of the newly found lands overseas. Rodríguez de Fonseca then began to plan and organize a series of voyages, under such captains as Alonso de Ojeda, Vicente Yáñez Pinzón, Diego de Lepe, and Rodrigo de Bastidas, which steadily expanded new discoveries and increased understanding of the islands and mainland of what quickly became known as a New World.[1]

	In 1503 Rodríguez de Fonseca organized and supervised an important new institution called the Board of Trade which assumed major responsibilities over the management of the new overseas settlements. He also took the leading role in the evolving Council of the Indies, which in time became the most influential royal institution governing the new settlements. Upon the death of Queen Isabella in 1504, an aging King Ferdinand allowed Fonseca almost unlimited scope in administering the overseas colonies.[1]

	...Over his long career, Rodríguez de Fonseca inevitably made many enemies, most notably the Dominican bishop, Bartolomé de las Casas, known as the Protector of the Indians, who denounced him for his indifference to the cruelties that Spanish settlers inflicted on the native population of the new lands: when told that 7,000 children had been slaughtered in Cuba in three months, he is said to have retorted "and how does that concern me?"[6] He also clashed with Hernán Cortés,[7]:127–128 conqueror of Mexico, which led to Cortes' removal from office in 1523.[1]


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antonio_de_Montesinos
	According to Bartolomé de las Casas, who was a witness, Montesinos asked those in attendance:

    	Tell me by what right of justice do you hold these Indians in such a cruel and horrible servitude? On what authority have you waged such detestable wars against these people who dealt quietly and peacefully on their own lands? Wars in which you have destroyed such an infinite number of them by homicides and slaughters never heard of before. Why do you keep them so oppressed and exhausted, without giving them enough to eat or curing them of the sicknesses they incur from the excessive labor you give them, and they die, or rather you kill them, in order to extract and acquire gold every day.[6]

	The sermon outraged the conquistadors, including Admiral Diego Columbus, the son of Christopher Columbus, as well as other representatives of the king. Montesinos's sermon had a formative impact upon las Casas, who heard it firsthand.[7] Las Casas became well known for his advocacy of the rights of indigenous peoples of the Americas.


some clergy were organizing expeditions, de Fonseca ended up running the whole thing. Fonseca and conquistadors got called out and Fonseca didn't care, conquistadors became enraged.


	...The initial result of the protests of the friars at Santo Domingo was an order from King Ferdinand II that Montesinos and other Dominicans who supported him should be shipped back to Spain. Ferdinand at first referred to the preaching of Montesinos as "a novel and groundless attitude" and a "dangerous opinion [that] would do much harm to all the affairs of that land."[9] After returning to Spain, Montesinos and his companions were able to persuade the king of the righteousness of their position.

	As a result, the king convened a commission that promulgated the Laws of Burgos, the first code of ordinances to protect the indigenous people, to regulate their treatment and conversion, and to limit the demands of the Spanish colonizers upon them.[10][11][12]


Montesinos and clergy supporting him were removed Santo Domingo to Spain. Spanish gov passed law protecting South Americans in 1512, but apparently didn't do much. (who's going to enforce it? the conquistadors themselves? apparently Velazquez almost got hit with it before he died when he opposed Cortes' expedition)

Was this end result bad? seems like it would have removed honest clergy from Santo Domingo, who would have been able to document the conquistadors crimes there.

wikipedia says a good thing that came out of it is that it helped inspire las Casas to change his mind later

regardless, seems clear that atrocities of conquistadores was a matter of public interest early on

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bartolom%C3%A9_de_las_Casas
	In 1513, as a chaplain, Las Casas participated in Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar's and Pánfilo de Narváez' conquest of Cuba. He participated in campaigns in Bayamo and Camagüey and in the massacre of Hatuey.[20] He witnessed many atrocities committed by Spaniards against the native Ciboney and Guanahatabey peoples. He later wrote: "I saw here cruelty on a scale no living being has ever seen or expects to see."[21] Las Casas and his friend Pablo de la Rentería were awarded a joint encomienda which was rich in gold and slaves, located on the Arimao River close to Cienfuegos. During the next years, he divided his time between being a colonist and his duties as an ordained priest.

	In 1514, Las Casas was studying a passage in the book Ecclesiasticus (Sirach)[22] 34:18–22[a] for a Pentecost sermon and pondering its meaning. Las Casas was finally convinced that all the actions of the Spanish in the New World had been illegal and that they constituted a great injustice. He made up his mind to give up his slaves and encomienda, and started to preach that other colonists should do the same. When his preaching met with resistance, he realized that he would have to go to Spain to fight there against the enslavement and abuse of the native people.[23] Aided by Pedro de Córdoba and accompanied by Antonio de Montesinos, he left for Spain in September 1515, arriving in Seville in November.[24][25]

	Las Casas and King Ferdinand

	Las Casas arrived in Spain with the plan of convincing the King to end the encomienda system. This was easier thought than done, as most of the people who were in positions of power were themselves either encomenderos or otherwise profiting from the influx of wealth from the Indies.[26] In the winter of 1515, King Ferdinand lay ill in Plasencia, but Las Casas was able to get a letter of introduction to the Majesty from the Archbishop of Seville, Diego de Deza. On Christmas Eve of 1515, Las Casas met the Monarch and discussed the situation in the Indies with him; the King agreed to hear him out in more detail at a later date. While waiting, Las Casas produced a report that he presented to the Bishop of Burgos, Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca, and secretary Lope Conchillos, who were functionaries in complete charge of the Royal policies regarding the Indies; both were encomenderos. They were not impressed by his account, and Las Casas had to find a different avenue of change. He put his faith in his coming audience with the King, but it never came, for King Ferdinand died on January 25, 1516.[27] The regency of Castile passed on to Ximenez Cisneros and Adrian of Utrecht who were guardians for the under-age Prince Charles. Las Casas was resolved to see Prince Charles who resided in Flanders, but on his way there he passed Madrid and delivered to the regents a written account of the situation in the Indies and his proposed remedies. This was his "Memorial de Remedios para Las Indias" of 1516.[28]


las Casas documented cruelty in Cuba, eventually preached to end slavery while there but met resistance. He took case to Spanish gov and wrote a report for the king, but kept getting sidelined. The report called for end of atrocities in New World but advocated importing slaves from Africa.

http://www.davidglensmith.com/wcjc/2327/slides/slides03-LasCasas.pdf

might have been first mention of idea of taking slaves from Africa to replace dying south Americans?


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bartolom%C3%A9_de_las_Casas#Memorial_de_Remedios_para_las_Indias
	Memorial de Remedios para las Indias

	The text, written 1516, starts by describing its purpose: to present "The remedies that seem necessary in order that the evil and harm that exists in the Indies cease, and that God and our Lord the Prince may draw greater benefits than hitherto, and that the republic may be better preserved and consoled."[78]

	Las Casas's first proposed remedy was a complete moratorium on the use of Indian labor in the Indies until such time as better regulations of it were set in place. This was meant simply to halt the decimation of the Indian population and to give the surviving Indians time to reconstitute themselves. Las Casas feared that at the rate the exploitation was proceeding it would be too late to hinder their annihilation unless action were taken rapidly. The second was a change in the labor policy so that instead of a colonist owning the labor of specific Indians, he would have a right to man-hours, to be carried out by no specific persons. This required the establishment of self-governing Indian communities on the land of colonists – who would themselves organize to provide the labor for their patron. The colonist would only have rights to a certain portion of the total labor, so that a part of the Indians were always resting and taking care of the sick. He proposed 12 other remedies, all having the specific aim of improving the situation for the Indians and limiting the powers that colonists were able to exercise over them.[79]

	The second part of the Memorial described suggestions for the social and political organization of Indian communities relative to colonial ones. Las Casas advocated the dismantlement of the city of Asunción and the subsequent gathering of Indians into communities of about 1,000 Indians to be situated as satellites of Spanish towns or mining areas. Here, Las Casas argued, Indians could be better governed, better taught and indoctrinated in the Christian faith, and would be easier to protect from abuse than if they were in scattered settlements. Each town would have a royal hospital built with four wings in the shape of a cross, where up to 200 sick Indians could be cared for at a time. He described in detail social arrangements, distribution of work, how provisions would be divided and even how table manners were to be introduced. Regarding expenses, he argued that "this should not seem expensive or difficult, because after all, everything comes from them [the Indians] and they work for it and it is theirs."[80] He even drew up a budget of each pueblo's expenses to cover wages for administrators, clerics, Bachelors of Latin, doctors, surgeons, pharmacists, advocates, ranchers, miners, muleteers, hospitalers, pig herders, fishermen, etc. He showed that this arrangement could easily be maintained and gold still be extracted at a profit.


Las Casas report said the gov would have to act quickly or the indiginous population of the Indies would be wiped out. He gave some reccomendations on how slavery could continue in the indies without killing the population and argued the colonies could still be profitable.

I guess Las Casas was operating under the assumption the colonists were profit-motivated. Raises same question brought up earlier, and I guess he saw too: if motivated by profit, why kill of population?


was this report released to the public? It sounds like argument tailored for the government. Although, his idea to import slaves from Africa was apparently made public since he addressed that later.

His book "A Brief Account of the Destruction of the Indies" comes of different in tone from description of his report to the king, more like appealing to conscience of readers and pleading. So far Las Casas comes off manipulative, sending different messages to different groups of people. Apparently his main goal was to stop depopulation of Indies one way or another, but looking at other writings on him gives the impression that his sort-of two-faced way of going about it was a basis of attacks against him.

Las Casas said to be person exposing atrocities of conquistadors early on, since 1514:


https://www.americamagazine.org/issue/las-casas-discovery
	In 1514, las Casas, 30, gave up his lands and the Indians in his possession and declared that he would refuse absolution to any Christian who would not do the same. Eventually, he joined the Dominican order and went on to become a passionate and prophetic defender of the indigenous peoples. For more than 50 years he traveled back and forth between the New World and the court of Spain, attempting through his books, letters and preaching to expose the cruelties of the conquest, whose very legitimacy, and not merely excesses, he disavowed.


his wiki page says Fonseca and a lot of other people tried to stop him in his efforts, got in a lot of political fights and had goons after him at one point. Some of his men were killed by goons and one of his supporters died mysteriously while he was making his case to gov. Fonseca ignored/blocked Las Casas' report on depopulation of Indies and continued to oppose his efforts. 


By 1516, according to Las Casas report, depoplation of Spanish territories in Indies was already dire. Search for new slave labor was said to be motivation for subsequent expeditions, many which were launched from Cuba.


------

Fonseca helped launch many expeditions, one of which had Francisco Pizarro among the crew, the expedition of Alonso de Ojeda


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alonso_de_Ojeda
	Alonso de Ojeda was a close relative of a member of the Court of the Inquisition, who had the same name. This relative presented him to the famous Archbishop of Burgos Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca who would later become president of the Council of the Indies.

	He distinguished himself in the conquest of Grenada, with his military abilities, his skill as a swordsman and his bravery. The young Ojeda quickly won the patronage of the Archbishop, who offered his protection at the first opportunity. Alonso was slight of stature, surprisingly agile and extremely accomplished with all types of weapons. In addition he was quick witted and insightful, he was brave to the point of recklessness, vindictive to the point of cruelty, softhearted with the weak and courteous with women, quarrelsome and a duellist, but he was deeply religious and rigorously observed his religious duties. The Archbishop thought the youth had a well-tempered soul and a generous heart, but he also noticed that his character had a depth of ambition that would help him to emulate Christopher Columbus.


according to wikipedia, Fonseca saw something in Ojeda and became his patron

Ojeda was crew in Columbus expedition and with Amerigo Vespucci


	...However, when the expedition arrived in Hispaniola on 5 September the followers of Christopher Columbus were angry because they considered that Ojeda was infringing upon Columbus’ exploring privileges. This resulted in brawls and fights between both groups, which left a number of dead and wounded. Ojeda took many captives back to Spain whom he sold as slaves. 


anything going on here? wiki article a little vague

	
	...However, the colony did not last for more than three months, as the new arrivals started attacking the indigenous villages in the area, causing constant conflict with them. In addition to this there were personal difficulties between Ojeda and his men. At this point Vergara and Campos took Ojeda prisoner and abandoned the settlement with the small amount of plunder that had been captured. Ojeda was put in prison in Hispaniola in May 1502, where he was held until 1504. He was released following an appeal made by Archbishop Rodríguez de Fonseca, although he had to pay a costly indemnity, which left him with little money.


Ojeda's expeditions failed by most ways of judging them, but Fonseca bailed him out. Why?


	...On regaining his freedom Ojeda remained in Hispaniola for four years with little to do. (Some authors think that, on his release from prison, Ojeda returned to Spain.[7]) Then in 1508 he learnt that King Ferdinand the Catholic was interviewing people interested in colonizing and governing the section of mainland between the capes of Cabo Gracias a Dios (on the border between present day Honduras and Nicaragua) and Cabo de la Vela in present-day Colombia. Juan de la Cosa went to Spain in order to represent Ojeda at court. One of Ojeda’s rivals was Diego de Nicuesa.

	Both candidates had good reputations and sympathizers at court, so the King decided to divide the region into two governorates: Veragua to the west and New Andalusia to the east as far as the Gulf of Urabá. The former was awarded to Nicuesa and the latter to Ojeda in a commission signed in 1508.[2]:95,134-135

	The new governors repaired to Santo Domingo in order to prepare the expeditionary flotillas. There was a great disparity between the two flotillas. As Nicuesa was wealthier and had better credit with the colonial authorities he was able to attract 800 men, many horses, five caravels and two brigs. While Ojeda’s flotilla only consisted of a little more than 300 men, two brigs and two smaller ships. Among those who embarked on these four vessels was Francisco Pizarro, the future conqueror of Peru. Hernán Cortés, who was later to dominate Mexico, would have been among the soldiers of fortune engaged in this adventure, had a sudden illness not prevented him from sailing. Due to the disputes regarding the extent of each of the two governorates, Juan de la Cosa decided that the River Atrato would form the boundary between the two regions.


Ojeda got commission to colonize New Andalusia (modern day Venezeula)

Ojeda went with 3 ships and 300 men. Pizarro was among them, and Cortes would have been but was said to be sick.

	
	Ojeda promised to make the wealthy lawyer Martín Fernández de Enciso mayor of the new colony that Ojeda planned to establish in New Andalusia. Encisco was ordered to follow on after the main flotilla with a chartered boat and more provisions. The main flotilla finally set sail from Santo Domingo on 10 November 1509, a few days ahead of Nicuesa. In an attempt to avoid problems with the indigenous peoples Ojeda took the unusual step of asking the writer Juan López de Palacios Rubios to draft a proclamation. This invited the local people to submit peacefully to rule by Imperial Spain or be forced to do so. The proclamation had the approval of the Spanish authorities.

	The flotilla arrived at Bahia de Calamar in present-day Cartagena (Colombia). This was against the wishes of De la Cosa who did not want to land in the area. After disembarking with about 70 men Ojeda encountered a number of indigenous tribes. He then sent out missionaries and interpreters to read out the proclamation that had been drafted by Palacios Rubios. The indigenous people were upset by this proclamation and so Ojeda tried to placate them by offering them trinkets. At this time the Spanish were also raiding villages to capture Indians for slaves. Ojeda was no exception to the cruelty of the Spanish against the native people. An eyewitness account recorded by historian Bartolomé de las Casas notes, "The Spaniards worked an incredible slaughter on that village, they spared no one, women, children, babies or not. Then they robbed."[8] These actions so provoked the indigenous people that they started to fight against the Spanish settlers. Ojeda defeated the natives in the coastal area and on pursuing some of the survivors who had escaped into the jungle he came upon the village of Turbaco. The Spanish were then taken by surprise by a counterattack. Nearly the entire party were wiped out in the battle and Juan de la Cosa sacrificed his life so that Ojeda could escape. Only one other Spanish soldier survived the battle and he and Ojeda fled back to the coast where they were rescued by the ships anchored in the bay.

	Nicuesa arrived with his flotilla soon after and, worried by Ojeda’s losses, he gave him arms and men. The two men then forgot their differences and joined forces to seek revenge on the people of Turbaco, who were massacred to a man.


Ojeda arrived in Bahia de Calamar (present day Columbia) against the wishes of one of his crew, De la Cosa. Ojeda sent out a proclamation to the Americans saying they had to submit to Imperial rule or be forced to do so, which angered them. At this time the Spanish (which?) were also raiding them and capturing slaves. de las Casa later interviewed an eyewitness who said Ojeda and his men slaughtered an entire village man, women, and children. Ojeda fought the Americans who counter-attacked and came to Turbaco, where almost all of Ojeda's party were wiped out. de la Cosa died and one other soldier escaped with Ojeda.

Ojeda's rival colonist Nicuesa met him and joined forces to seek revenge on Turbaco, who they wiped out.


account of same in "Rivers of Gold: The Rise of the Spanish Empire, from Columbus to Magellan" By Hugh Thomas:


https://books.google.com/books?id=CbS6AQAAQBAJ&pg=PA277&lpg=PA277
	They stopped in the Canaries and at La Espanola, where they picked up more men, including Franciso Pizarro

	...The expedition dropped anchor at Turbaco, near Cartagena, where the local Indians had dark memories of the brutal visit there of Cristobal Guerra. Hojeda thought of entering the nearby harbor of Calamar, in order to capture Indians as slaves and send them to La Espanola to settle various debts that he had there. Juan de la Cosa, as captain-general, remembered the poisoned darts that he had encountered in the past and advised against any such effort. But Hojeda insisted and made a surprise attack on the place, capturing sixty natives. Those who escaped fled to Turbaco.

	The Castilians pursued them and reached the settlement, but Hojeda found himself isolated. His men were left behind in the mountains, and the Indians, regrouping, attacking in surprisingly well-directed waves. Hojeda fought bravely, but in the end, he committed himself to flight and ran to the safety of the nearby ships. But Juan de la Cosa, hero or villain of so many voyages to the New World, was surrounded in a hut, and on February 28, 1510, was killed by arrows, along with perhaps seventy others. He was then sixty years old.

	The men left behind on the boats eventually went in dinghies to look for the refugees. They found Hojeda fainting in a mangrove swamp. The brothers Diego de Ordaz and Pizarro also saved themselves.


If this is right, Hojeda, Pizarro, and Diego de Ordaz fled and left de la Cosa and his men for dead. de la Cosa didn't want to go to Turbaco but Hojeda insisted, and wiki article says de la Cosa "sacrificed himself to save Ojeda". Something going on here?

	
	This battle of Turbaco was the first serious defeat of the Spaniards since Navidad in 1493.

	At this point, Deigo de Nicuesa hove into sight with two naos and three brigantines, as well as several hundred fresh soldiers. Thus in a sense reinforced, Hojeda returned to the battle and even to Turbaco, which he destroyed. He burned the huts and cut the throats of those inhabitants whom he captured.

	...The conditions in San Sebastian de Uraba--the first attempt at the establishment of a colony on the mainland--were discouraging. Hojeda's supplies ran out, the local Indians pursued him and his men with more poisoned arrows, and disease took its usual appalling toll. Fortunately for the Spaniards, a ship of seventy refugees from justice in La Espanola, all criminals, captained by Bernardino de Talavera, soon appeared. They had stolen a ship from Genoese merchants at Punta del Tiburon. But they were helpful to Hojeda.

	The colony soon used up the supplies brought by Talavera, and Hojeda decided to return to Santo Domingo in the stolen ship with about half the expedition. As for those left behind, if help had not arrived in fifty days, the survivors, under the command of Francisco Pizarro, who had been a resourceful second in command to Hojeda since the death of la Cosa, should do what they could to save themselves.


Pizarro became second in command behind Hojeda after the death of la Cosa, and was in charge of the colony when Hojeda left. Hojeda was rescued and reinforced by a band of criminals who I guess got along with him and Pizarro.



de la Cosa was famous, was on Columbus voyage, Amerigo Vespucci, did official exploring and business for Queen Isabella, I guess generally hot shot explorer

another account of death of de la Cosa:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juan_de_la_Cosa
	In 1509 Juan de la Cosa set out for the seventh and last time for the New World. He carried two hundred colonists on three ships, and on reaching Haiti placed himself under the command of Alonso de Ojeda, who added another ship with one hundred settlers to the expedition. After having settled an old border dispute between Alonso de Ojeda and Diego de Nicuesa, they went with Francisco Pizarro into de Ojeda's territory and landed at the future site of Cartagena. This was against the warnings of de la Cosa, who proposed they disembark on the more peaceful coast of the Gulf of Uraba. When the Spanish came ashore, they got in a fight with the natives on the Bay of Calamar, and drove them off. Emboldened by the Spanish victory, de Ojeda decided to go further into the forest, to the native village at the future site of Turbaco. When they arrived at the town, they were attacked by the natives, and de la Cosa was shot with poison arrows and killed. De Ojeda escaped, and fled to the coast. Another Spanish expedition passed by, and de Ojeda told them of the murderous natives. The men of the other expedition joined de Ojeda for a punitive attack on that village, killing all of its inhabitants to avenge de la Cosa's death.


according to this, de la Cosa "decided to go further into the forest", was killed, de Ojeda escaped and convinced Nicuesa and his men to attack Turbaco to avenge de la Cosa's death.

Did he tell Nicuesa's men why they were fighting the Americans in the first place?



this telling similar to Ojeda's wikipedia article:
https://books.google.com/books?id=qUEFAAAAQAAJ&pg=RA1-PA286&lpg=RA1-PA286

Says de la Cosa tried to save Ojeda, only one other escaped (not named), Ojeda told Nicuesa what happened and both agreed on revenge.


similar:

https://books.google.com/books?id=gHNAAAAAMAAJ&pg=RA1-PA313&lpg=RA1-PA313
	In the dusk of the evening they arrived at a village called Yurbaco; the inhabitants of which had feld to the mountains with their wives and children and principal effects. The Spaniards, imagining that the Indians were completely terrified and dispersed, now roved in quest of booty among the deserted houses, which stood distant from each other, buried among the trees. While they were thus scattered, troops of savages rushed forth, with furious yells, from all parts of the forest. The Spaniards endeavoured to gather together and support each other, but every little party was surrounded by a host of foes. They fought with desperate bravery, but for once their valour and their iron armour were of no avail; they were overwhelmed by the numbers and sank beneath war-clubs and poisoned arrows.

	Ojeda on the first alarm collected a few soldiers and ensconced himself within a small enclosure, surrounded by palisades. Here he was closely besieged and galled by flights of arrows. He threw himself on his knees, covered himself with his buckler, and, being small and active, managed to protected himself from the deadly shower, but all his companions were slain by his side, some of them perishing in frightful agonies. At this fearful moment the veteran La Cosa, having heard of the peril of his commander, arrived, with a few followers, to his assistance. Stationing himself at the gate of the palisades, the brave Biscayan kept the savages at bay until most of his men were slain and he himself was severely wounded. Just then Ojeda sprang forth like a tiger into the midst of the enemy, dealing his blows on every side. La Cosa would have seconded him, but was crippled by his wounds. He took refuge with the remnant of his men in an Indian cabin; the straw roof of which he aided them to throw off, lest the enemy should set it on fire. Here he defended himself until all his comrades, but one, were destroyed. The subtle poison of his wounds at length overpowered him, and he sank to the ground. Feeling death at hand, he called to his only surviving companion. "Brother," said he, "since God hath protected thee from harm, sally forth and fly, and if ever thou shouldst see Alonzo de Ojeda, tell him of my fate!"


this sounds off

pretty sure crouching in the middle of his men and speed-deflecting arrows with his buckler while they all died except him is made-up

if de la Cosa and his men arrived after that, who would be the one to tell that story except Ojeda?

If in the middle of fighting them and in "iron armour" and apparently carrying a giant buckler, how did Ojeda outrun them?

or the guy stuck in a cabin surrounded by pissed-off Americans--would be hard to escape from that


this telling written by Washington Irving in 1829, see parts of it in Titan magazine account of same published in 1847. Notable that Titan magazine account said Ojeda and his men were savages too and unchristian, while Irving did not and wrote like they were heroes in one of his novels. Probably worth seeing where this version of the story originated. 




https://books.google.com/books?id=XDqFMqS9MxkC&pg=PA80&lpg=PA80
	Indian Freedom: The Cause of Bartolomé de Las Casas, 1484-1566

	...He then decided, on the strength of his victory, to go after the Indians who had fled, hot on their heels to a village four leagues away, Turbaco by name. The villagers were alerted by the news brought by those fleeing. They took off with their wives, chidlren, valuables, and hid in the hills for safety. When the Spaniards arrived in the morning, they found no one to kill or capture. The Spaniards were careless, they had no idea the Indians were intelligent beings and that violence tought them lessons, as did human nature. So, with utter disregard and blinded by their own greed and sinfulness, the Spaniards scattered each on his own through the hills looking for someone to rob. Once the Indians, through their scouts, recognized that the Spaniards had broken up, they came out of the hills and attacked with a shout that split the sky and with a volley of poisoned arrows that seemed to darken the day. And the Spaniards, caught in their carelessness-no one would ever dare attack them!--and in such a sudden charge, were fear stricken, they were like game encircled, they didn't know where to hide, where to run, they were stunned. If they ran one way, there were Indians ready for them; if they ran another, they were finished--those same poisoned arrows the Indians killed some of them with, they yanked from the dead bodies and used again to wound and kill other Spaniards who were still on their feet.

	Juan de la Cosa, with a few men he collected around him, barricaded the entrance to an enclosure where Hojeda and another few were making a stand. Hojeda was up and down on his knees behind his shield to block the arrows. He was short and with his lightness, quickness, he kept from getting struck. But the second he saw all of his people down dead, and Juan de la Cosa and the group with him nearly finished, he took off at high speed, trusting the great quickness he had--and it was amazing!--right through the Indians fleeing so fast he seemed to by flying. He got up into the thickest hills he could find and headed towards the sea, as best he could judge direction, and towards his ships.

	Juan de la Cosa holed up in a hut stripped of its covering--or he stripped it as best he could, he and some of his men. The Indians couldn't burn them to death with just the frame. He fought until the last of his companions was down and dead. He felt the poison from the many arrows that had nicked him begin to work, so he sank in despair. But he saw one of his own men still left near him, fighting manfully away, the Indian's hadn't touched him. He said to the man, "God has spared you till now, brother, so run for it, save yourself, tell Hojeda you left me dead." This man was the only one to escape, I think, plus Hojeda.


apparently the story originated with Las Casas...


massacre at Turbaco was in 1510. According to this, nobody returned and Pizarro sailed to Santo Domingo afterward:


https://www.thoughtco.com/biography-of-francisco-pizarro-2136558
	Beset by angry natives and low on supplies, Hojeda set out for Santo Domingo in early 1510 for reinforcements and supplies. When Hojeda did not return after fifty days, Pizarro set out with the surviving settlers to return to Santo Domingo. Along the way, they joined an expedition to settle the Darién region: Pizarro served as second-in-command to Vasco Nuñez de Balboa.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francisco_Pizarro
	In 1524, while still in Panama, Pizarro formed a partnership with a priest, Hernando de Luque and a soldier, Diego de Almagro, to explore and conquer the South. Pizarro, Almagro and Luque later explicitly renewed their compact,[5]:24 agreeing to conquer and divide equally among themselves the empire they hoped to vanquish. While their accord was strictly oral, they dubbed their enterprise the Empresa del Levante and determined that Pizarro would command the expedition, Almagro would provide military and food supplies and Luque would be in charge of finances and additional provisions.[4]:95
