

iirc Mao kindof like Trump


idiot, arrogant, thinks he's the greatest

sociopathic tendencies

easily manipulated


writes poetry and makes everybody read it


------

from tombstone book:


	THE CHENGDU CONFERENCE: THE GENERAL LINE TAKES SHAPE
	The Chengdu Conference that convened on March 9, 1958, was an enlarged meeting of the Politburo standing committee, but not all provincial party secretaries were invited. Mao was in a state of excitement, continually interposing remarks while listening to reports. He delivered six lengthy speeches during the eighteen-day meeting, and Wu Lengxi described him as “brimming with ideas, radiating vital energy, and in an invincibly advantageous position.”31


	...He said, “In comparing the two methods, one a Marxist ‘rash advance’ and one a non-Marxist opposition to rash advance, which should we adopt? I believe we should adopt the rash advance.” He called for daring thought and action, and particularly encouraged young people: “Ever since ancient times, innovative thinking has always originated with under-educated young people.” “History shows that those with little education overturn those who are well-educated.”



Mao's disposition


	...Faced with a Mao “radiating vital energy and invincibility,” Liu Shaoqi conceded:
	The Chairman is wiser than any of us; whether in terms of thinking, viewpoints, impact, or methods, none of us can come close to matching him. It’s our duty to genuinely learn from him, or it should be said that we must learn to the best of our capabilities. Of course there are some areas where we can’t hope to match the Chairman; with his rich historical and theoretical knowledge, his wealth of revolutionary experience, and his prodigious memory, none of us can hope to absorb all there is to learn from him … Ultimately, how fast should China’s socialist construction proceed?… at present right-deviating conservatism seems to be holding sway.35
	Then, on March 25, Zhou Enlai again criticized himself for opposing rash advance:
	I take the main responsibility for submitting the report opposing rash advance, in effect dashing cold water on the upsurge among the masses. The result was not to promote but to hinder; not greater, faster, better, and more economical, but less, slower, shoddier, and more wasteful … that is the essence of the problem.
	The error of opposing rash advance was in taking one finger for many fingers, and imposing restrictions and fetters instead of bolstering the mass upsurge and coming up with solutions. At that time I lacked perception, and it was only later that I gradually came to understand that this was a directional error on the issue of socialist construction.36


buttering him up


	...The pervasive control under the people’s communes was presented as an ultimate good. One slogan, attributed to Mao’s ally Kang Sheng, stated that “communism is paradise, and the people’s commune is the golden bridge.”
	Mao’s fascination with the people’s communes can be traced back to his youthful passion for the New Village Movement. In December 1919 he wrote:
	The basic ideal is connecting the New Family, New School, and the New Society into one unit.
	Each student in the New School creates a member of the New Family. The more students there are in the New School, the more New Families will be created. Combining several New Families can create a New Society. The New Society is inexhaustible in its variety, including public nurseries, public nursing homes, public schools, public libraries, public banks, public farms, public factories, public stores, public theaters, public hospitals, parks, museums, and autonomous regions.30


kang advising slogans, Mao obsessed with new ways of doing things



------


https://www.quora.com/Was-Chairman-Mao-himself-an-intellectual
	If you read about Mao's later years, it's all about how a Chinese emperor in the traditional mold surrounded by sycophants and courtiers let his own fears and inadequacies drive him to nuttiness, while the Chinese Communist Party leadership stood by and did nothing until he died. As a witness to Khrushchev's secret 1956 speech denouncing Stalin, he became paranoid about how he would be treated after his own death, and launched the Cultural Revolution to attack those he considered secret enemies waiting for him to die. He was egged on by his wife, Jiang Qing, who had been an actress in Shanghai, and used Mao and the Cultural Revolution to exact revenge on those who she thought had earlier insulted her by not accepting her into the party or as a legitimate policy advisor to Mao. After Mao's death she would be arrested as a leader of the Gang of Four, and committed suicide in jail in 1991. Before that, Mao successfully destroyed the Chinese intellectual class, replacing it with nonsense and mumbo-jumbo which his party sycophants praised him to the sky about.

	Mao was not an intellectual; he was a pseudo-intellectual. If one of his lieutenants put a bullet in his head in the 1950s, all Chinese would have been spared a lot of unnecessary suffering.


	...He would like to believe himself as an intellectual, he sure put on an intellectual facade. He wrote stupid little books using basic high school science knowledge to explain the universe and proclaimed he had expanded the communism philosophy on top of Marx. He had written verses and poems, except his best poems all came from plagiarism. He used his charisma and political power to establish himself as some kind of living god, enjoyed enormous personal worship and make sure his every word, wise or stupid (mostly stupid), are treated like some holy decree.

	But in the end, he's just an ignorant grass root politician who's way more interested in manipulating people than learning knowledge. And because he knew he can't fake knowledge among real intellectuals and because he's paranoid and insecure, he had heavily prosecuted intellectuals, drove them away from his power center, make sure none of them can speak up against him and expose his lack of real knowledge...

	I think Mao's irrational hatred against intellectuals are deeply rooted in his inferiority complex and his paranoia. As a result, millions of people had suffered.


------


https://books.google.com/books?id=4j5UoOoQZCIC&pg=PT69&lpg=PT69
	...would come to be known, infamously, as the Gang of Four.

	By early 1966, their efforts to manipulate Mao in his dotage were succeeding. "Your orders are being ignored," he was warned, "and your authority is being usurped." Mao thought he could hasten China's development by re-revolutionizing China--and to do so, he had to reaffirm his potency and assert his preeminence. This mean, for starts, that Liu Shaaoqi and Deng Xiaoping had to do.


GoF said to manipulate Mao


https://books.google.com/books?id=OqjeBAAAQBAJ&pg=PA201&lpg=PA201&dq=%22manipulate+Mao%22&source=bl&ots=1NNNEYzpyN&sig=JAF3qGIHfWhjProOYmheWvYHl4Y&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiZ8temvtnaAhXwqlkKHXG_AY8Q6AEIOjAE#v=onepage&q=%22manipulate%20Mao%22&f=false


https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/12/10/the-hungry-years
	Never mind that more than twelve million people had died during the Madras Famine of 1877, even though India had been equipped by its British rulers with railroads and a free market in grains, or that Ireland, during the Great Potato Famine, thirty years earlier, had suffered from Britain’s heartlessly enforced ideology of laissez-faire. The Herald deplored the “antiquated learning” of the Chinese, and described the heroic figure who could rescue China from misery: “The man wanted in China now, as in its early days, is a patriotic engineer,” someone “single-minded and energetic” and possessing “commanding energy and resolution.”

	In due course, China got just such a big-thinking, single-minded “patriotic engineer.” His name was Mao Zedong, and his uneducated infatuation with the signs and symbols of modern progress—gigantic projects and economic statistics—caused a famine that dwarfed even the Incredible Famine. The Great Famine of 1958-62 is thought to have taken more than thirty million lives, and perhaps as many as forty-five million. Two new books use fresh evidence to describe the stubborn delusions and cruelties of the man who believed that, among other things, hundreds of millions of Chinese making steel in their back-yard furnaces could surpass the industrial production of Western countries. “Tombstone,” by the Chinese journalist Yang Jisheng (Farrar, Straus & Giroux), is the first major Chinese account of the causes and consequences of that famine. “Mao: The Real Story,” by Alexander V. Pantsov and Steven I. Levine (Simon & Schuster), draws on Russian archives to show, more clearly than before, that this apparently unparalleled tale of cruel folly was not without precedent in the twentieth century—the age of ideological excess.


Mao obsessed with some notion of "progress", industrialization


	...Few people in China in the nineteen-twenties and thirties observed Stalin’s brutal but efficacious engineering more closely than Mao Zedong, then a restless young convert to Communism. Like many Chinese picking their way through the ruins of the Qing Empire, Mao was convinced that China had to transform itself, as the Soviet Union had done, into a powerful nation-state in order to survive the hostility of the capitalist-imperialist West. In this project, the Soviet Union was the indispensable nation, first as fraternal pioneer and then as ideological foil. Pantsov and Levine’s examination of Russian archives reveals that the Chinese Communist Party, from its inception, in 1921, was deeply dependent on Soviet money, expertise, and ideological guidance. It also shows, in absorbing detail, how Mao’s catastrophic “concept of a special Chinese path of development,” as Pantsov and Levine assert, “could arise only in the post-Stalin environment.”


Pantsov and Levine book on soviet support installing Mao?


	...But China’s “patriotic engineer” was not content, telling his personal physician, “When I say, ‘Learn from the Soviet Union,’ we don’t have to learn how to shit and piss from the Soviet Union, too, do we?” Mao was intellectually insecure, having risen to power only after long and bitter struggles with better-educated, Soviet-backed Party leaders; he had always resented the unbalanced and yet unavoidable Chinese relationship with the Soviet Union. Stalin’s death, in 1953, and Nikita Khrushchev’s repudiation of Stalin, in 1956, helped Mao finally break free of his dependency. Socialism in China, as he saw it, was to be “more, better, faster” than even Stalin could imagine. Using the country’s great advantage—cheap and abundant labor—China would make the Great Leap Forward, doubling, even tripling, agricultural and industrial production in a few years.



iirc Mao liked Stalin and distrusted Kruschev

became competetive with Soviet union, wanted to beat them in production of steel even though didn't need steel


	As Pantsov and Levine point out, “Mao had no concrete plans for the Great Leap Forward.” All he did was repeat the incantation “We can catch up with England in fifteen years.” In fact, as Yang Jisheng’s “Tombstone” shows, neither experts nor the Central Committee discussed “Mao’s grand plan.” The Chinese President and Mao cultist Liu Shaoqi endorsed it, and a boastful fantasy became, as Yang writes, “the guiding ideology of the party and the country.”


Mao I think just wanted bigger numbers

Liu Shaoqi apparently went along with it, buttered him up


	A hundred absurd schemes, such as close planting of seeds for better yields, now flowered, as loudspeakers boomed out the song “We Will Overtake England and Catch Up to America.” Mao constantly looked for ways to productively deploy the world’s biggest national population: farmers were taken out of fields and sent to work building reservoirs and irrigation channels, digging wells, and dredging river bottoms. Yang points out that, since these projects “were undertaken with an unscientific approach, many were a waste of manpower and resources.” But there was no dearth of sycophantic officials ready to run with Mao’s vaguest commands, among them Liu Shaoqi. Visiting a commune in 1958, Liu swallowed the claims by local officials that irrigating yam fields with dog-meat broth increased agricultural output. “You should start raising dogs, then,” he told them. “Dogs are very easy to breed.” Liu also became an instant expert on close planting, suggesting that peasants use tweezers for weeding the seedlings.


Liu Shaoqi involved in specifics of promoting bogus agriculture plans


	...Apprised of the catastrophe in Xinyang, Mao blamed “counter-revolutionaries” and “ruthless class retaliation” by Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalists (his old rivals, who were by then ensconced in Taiwan). Someone had to be punished, and though Mao balked at the death sentence—“I’ve never killed a county Party secretary,” he claimed—the officials responsible were imprisoned and persecuted. Yang denounces the outcome as “manifestly unjust”: local operatives were punished while the central government, which formulated and promoted the fatal policies, remained “correct and glorious.” Mao, much more than China’s leaders today, was the beneficiary of a widespread faith in the wisdom and the noble intentions of the central government. In “Tombstone,” Mao emerges as patriotic but megalomaniacal, crudely vindictive, and utterly inept. Yang is clear that Mao presided over a “totalitarian” system, but he avoids simpleminded Western presentations of Mao as the Oriental Hitler.


Mao blamed "counter-revolutionaries" for the famine?

said to be megalomaniacal, vindictive, inept


	...Mao wasn’t entirely immune to self-doubt and periodically revealed himself to be a clear-sighted observer of the system’s debilities. In an internal Party communiqué in 1959, he admitted, “Much of the falsehood has been prompted by the upper levels through boasting, pressure, and reward, leaving little alternative to those below.”


Mao apparently realised he was getting false reports in 1959


	“Tombstone” also presents fascinating instances in which local officials ignored or reversed orders from the central government, improvising policies of their own. In early 1961, Zeng Xisheng, the Party chief of Anhui province, who had condemned thousands to premature death in his zeal for high procurement targets, boldly overturned Mao’s collectivization project by contracting land to individual households. This commonsensical solution dawned on him after he heard of a seventy-three-year-old peasant who, with his tubercular son and using a single shovel, cultivated a plot of land in the mountains: after reaping an abundant harvest, the man sold his surplus grain to the state while also feeding himself. Mao encouraged Zeng to experiment with the so-called “responsibility fields.” “Give it a try,” he reportedly said. “If it doesn’t work, carry out self-criticism. If it works well . . . that will be splendid!”


Mao open to policies that worked?

introduced to idea by Zeng Xisheng

information that got to Mao important


	Zeng’s experiment, which daringly contradicted Mao’s fantasy of collectivism, proved to be successful, and Anhui was among the first provinces to recover from the famine, in 1962. But by then Mao had been made insecure by the open acknowledgment of the Party’s policy errors by Liu Shaoqi and others. In early 1962, Liu, clearly striving for an acceptable ratio, described the famine as “three parts natural disaster and seven parts man-made disaster.” Later that year, he had the temerity to inform the Chairman that “history will record the role you and I played in the starvation of so many people, and the cannibalism will also be memorialized!” Mao, recoiling from such criticism, now wanted to assert his ideological infallibility and revert to the old method—the evidently true one of Communism.


Lui was the guy who told Mao history books will record famine--get Mao in mind of trying to cover it up?


------


on Mao being inept, psycopath, arrogant:

http://bookfi.net/dl/1026321/4847c5
	...he was deterred by having to learn Russian. He made a stab at it, taking lessons from a Russian emigre (and agent), Sergei Polevoy But according to Polevoy the other students teased Mao when he could not even master the alphabet, and he left in a huff Unlike many of his radical contemporaries, including most of the future Chinese Communist leaders, Mao went to neither France nor Russia.


https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Mao_Zedong#Quotes
	The chaos caused was on a grand scale and I take responsibility. Comrades, you must all analyse your own responsibility. If you have to shit, shit! If you have to fart, fart! You will feel much better for it.
	--Speech At The Lushan Conference (23 July 1959)


    Maybe you're afraid of sinking. Don't think about it. If you don't think about it, you won't sink. If you do, you will.
	--Swimming advice to physician Zhisui Li (1966), quoted in The TIME 100 (13 April 1998)


	[Mao] has played politics with Asian cunning. … [and] has always been a master at concealing his true intention. … I was always on my guard with him.
	--Nikita Khrushchev, as quoted in A. Doak Barnett (1977) China and the major powers in East Asia, page 352


http://bookfi.net/dl/1026321/4847c5
	Mao clashed frequently with his tutors. He ran away from his first school at the age of ten, claiming that the teacher was a martinet. He was expelled from, or was "asked to leave," at least three schools for being headstrong and disobedient. His mother indulged him but his father was not pleased, and Mao's hopping from tutor to tutor was just one source of tension between father and son. Yi-chang paid for Mao's education, hoping that his son could at least help keep the family accounts, but Mao disliked the task. All his life, he was vague about figures, and hopeless at economics. Nor did he take kindly to hard physical labour. He shunned it as soon as his peasant days were over.

	...Mao did not organise any peasant action in the style of poor versus rich. This was partly because he thought it was pointless. He had told Borodin and some other Communists before, on 18 January 1924:

		if we carry out struggles against big landlords, we are bound to fail. [In some areas, some Communists] organised the illiterate peasants first, then led them in struggles against relatively rich and big landlords. What was the result? Our organisations were immediately broken, banned, and these peasants not only did not regard us as fighting for their interests, they hated us, saying that if we hadn't organised them, there would not have been disasters, or misfortune. Therefore, until we are confident that our grassroots branches in the countryside are strong . . . we cannot adopt the policy of taking drastic steps against relatively rich landowners.

	Mao was being pragmatic. A Communist called Wang Hsien-tsung in Mao's area was organising poor peasants to improve their lot at the time when Mao was in Shaoshan. He was accused of being a bandit, and was arrested, tortured and beheaded by the local police.

	...When Mao first told the troops that they were about to become "Mountain Lords"--bandits--they were dumbfounded. This was not why they had joined a Communist revolution. But, speaking in the name of the Party, he assured them that they would be special bandits--part of an international revolution. Banditry was also their best chance, he argued: "Mountain Lords have never been wiped out, let alone us."


https://www.thevintagenews.com/2016/09/26/1958-mao-zedong-ordered-sparrows-killed-ate-much-grain-caused-one-worst-environmental-disasters-history/
	In 1958 Mao Zedong ordered all the sparrows to be killed because they ate too much grain. This caused one of the worst environmental disasters in history


http://bookfi.net/dl/1026321/4847c5
	...he wrote extensive commentaries on a book called A System of Ethics by a minor late-nineteenth-century German philosopher, Friedrich Paulsen. In these notes, Mao expressed the central elements in his own character, which stayed consistent for the remaining six decades of his life and defined his rule.

	...Mao's attitude to morality consisted of one core, the self "I," above everything else: "I do not agree with the view that to be moral, the motive of one's action has to be benefiting others. Morality does not have to be defined in relation to others . . . People like me want to . . . satisfy our hearts to the full, and in doing so we automatically have the most valuable moral codes. Of course there are people and objects in the world, but they are all there only for me."

	Mao shunned all constraints of responsibility and duty: "People like me only have a duty to ourselves; we have no duty to other people." "I am responsible only for the reality that I know, he wrote, "and absolutely not responsible for anything else. I don't know about the past, I don't know about the future. They have nothing to do with the reality of my own self." He explicitly rejected any responsibility towards future generations. "Some say one has a responsibility for history: I don't believe it. I am only concerned about developing myself. . . I have my desire and act on it. I am responsible to no one."

	...He argued that conscience could go to hell if it was in conflict with his impulses:

		These two should be one and the same. All our actions. . . are driven by impulse, and the conscience that is wise goes along with this in every instance. Sometimes . . . conscience restrains impulses such as over-eating or over-indulgence in sex. But conscience is only there to restrain, not oppose. And the restraint is for better completion of the impulse.

	As conscience always implies some concern for other people, and is not a corollary of hedonism, Mao was rejecting the concept. His view was: "I do not think these [commands like 'do not kill,' 'do not steal' and 'do not slander'] have to do with conscience. I think they are only out of self-interest for self-preservation." All considerations must "be purely calculation for oneself and absolutely not for obeying external ethical codes, or for so-called feelings of responsibility. . ."

	...These attributes he held to be reserved for "Great Heroes"--a group to which he appointed himself For this elite, he said:

	Everything outside their nature, such as restrictions and constraints, must be swept away by the great strength in their nature . . . When Great Heroes give full play to their impulses, they are magnificently powerful, stormy and invincible. Their power is like a hurricane arising from a deep gorge, and like a sex-maniac on heat and prowling for a lover. . . there is no way to stop them.

https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/esau-35.pdf
	Central Intelligence Agency
	Intelligence Report

	...Mao's arrogance has continued to create friction.

	...Mao supremely arrogant, rejected minor CPSU concessions, demanded CPSU self-humiliation.


http://bookfi.net/dl/1026321/4847c5
	On the eve of his departure from Changsha, Mao took a stroll along the Xiang River, and wrote a poem in which he looked to the future:

		Eagles soar up the long vault,
		Fish fly down the shallow riverbed,
		Under a sky of frost, ten thousand creatures vie to impose their will.
		Touched by this vastness,
		I ask the boundless earth:
		who after all will be your master?

	Mao's nose did not fail him. Within two weeks of arriving in Canton, in September 1925, he was given a clutch of key jobs by the Nationalist chief Mao was to be Wang Ching-wei's stand-in, running the Propaganda Department, as well as editor of the Nationalists' new journal, Politics Weekly. And to underline his prominence, he also sat on the five-man committee vetting delegates for the Nationalists' second congress the following January at which he delivered one of the major reports. Wang's role in Mao's rise is something which has been sedulously obscured by Peking, all the more so because Wang became the head of the Japanese puppet government in the 1940s.

	...When he came to the question "How do we change [China]?," Mao laid the utmost emphasis on destruction: "the country must be . . . destroyed and then re-formed." He extended this line not just to China but to the whole world-and even the universe: "This applies to the county, to the nation, and to mankind . . . The destruction of the universe is the same. . . People like me long for its destruction, because when the old universe is destroyed, a new universe will be formed. Isn't that better!"

	...What fascinated Mao was violence that smashed the social order. And it was this propensity that caught Moscow's eye, as it fitted into the Soviet model of a social revolution. Mao was now published for the first time in the Comintern journal

	...Jiangxi men left town and moved across the River Gan to put themselves out of Mao's reach. They sent out a circular with this description of Mao:

		He is extremely devious and sly, selfish, and full of megalomania. To his comrades, he orders them around, frightens them with charges of crimes, and victimises them. He rarely holds discussions about Party matters . . . Whenever he expresses a view, everyone must agree, otherwise he uses the Party organisation to clamp down on you, or invents some trumped-up theories to make life absolutely dreadful for you. . .Mao always uses political accusations to strike at comrades. His customary method regarding cadres is to . . . use them as his personal tools. To sum up . . . not only is he not a revolutionary leader, he is not a . . . Bolshevik. Mao's goal, they said, was to "become Party Emperor."

	...It was through the Yenan Terror that Mao accomplished another most important goal: building up his own personality cult. People who lived through this period all remembered it as a turning point when they "firmly established in our minds that Chairman Mao is our only wise leader." Till then it had been possible to admire Mao while having reservations about him, and to gossip about his marriage to Jiang Qing while still supporting him as the leader. When they were first told to "study" a Mao speech, many had responded with an audible groan: "the same old thing," "can't be bothered to go over it again," "too simplistic." Quite a few had been reluctant to chant "Long live Chairman Mao." One recalled thinking: "This was a slogan for emperors. Why are we doing this? I felt creepy and refused to shout it." This kind of independent talk--and thinking--was killed off by the campaign, and the deification of Mao established. 


http://alphahistory.com/chineserevolution/lin-biao/
	Lin was also an active contributor to the Maoist cult of personality, compiling a collection of writings called Quotations from Chairman Mao Zedong; it became the famous ‘Little Red Book’, one of the enduring icons of communist China. During the Cultural Revolution era Lin commissioned hundreds of propaganda images that glorified Mao, the PLA and the Red Guards.


https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/works/red-book/quotes.htm
	150 Quotes from Mao Tse Tung

	When we look at a thing, we must examine its essence and treat its appearance merely as an usher at the threshold, and once we cross the threshold, we must grasp the essence of the thing; this is the only reliable and scientific method of analysis. 

	“A Single Spark Can Start a Prairie Fire” (January 5, 1930), Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 119.

	...Marxist philosophy holds that the law of the unity of opposites is the fundamental law of the universe. This law operates universally, whether in the natural world, in human society, or in man's thinking. Between the opposites in a contradiction there is at once unity and struggle, and it is this that impels things to move and change. Contradictions exist everywhere, but they differ in accordance with the different nature of different things. In any given phenomenon or thing, the unity of opposites is conditional, temporary and transitory, and hence relative, whereas the struggle of opposites is absolute.
	
	On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People, (February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., p. 18.


https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/selected-works/volume-9/mswv9_01.htm
	WHERE DO CORRECT IDEAS COME FROM?

	This passage is from the “Draft Decision of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party on Certain Problems in Our Present Rural Work”, which was drawn up under the direction of Comrade Mao Tse-tung. The passage was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung himself

	...Countless phenomena of the objective external world are reflected in a man’s brain through his five sense organs  —  the organs of sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch. At first, knowledge is perceptual. The leap to conceptual knowledge, i.e., to ideas, occurs when sufficient perceptual knowledge is accumulated. This is one process in cognition. It is the first stage in the whole process of cognition, the stage leading from objective matter to subjective consciousness from existence to ideas. Whether or not one’s consciousness or ideas (including theories, policies, plans or measures) do correctly reflect the laws of the objective external world is not yet proved at this stage


------


Mao decide one day "we are going to double steel"

http://bookfi.net/dl/1026321/4847c5
	Another fiasco that drained the peasants' energy and brought disaster, was an order from Mao that the entire nation had to "make steel." The Superpower Programme needed a lot of steel-and steel was also Mao's yardstick for superpower status. When he boasted to Communist leaders in Moscow in 1957 that China would "overtake Britain in fifteen years" (which he later shortened to three) and when he told the Chinese he was fully confident that China could "overtake America" in ten years, steel output was what he had in mind. Mao set the 1958 target at 10.7 million tons. How this came about illustrates his broad-brush approach to economics. Sitting by his swimming pool in Zhongnanhai on 19 June he said to the metallurgy minister: "Last year, steel output was 5.3 million tons. Can you double it this year?" The yes-man said: "All right." And that was that. Steel mills and related industries like coal mines were ordered to go flat out to speed up production. Rules, and common sense, were cast aside. Equipment was overworked to the point of breakdown, and over 30,000 workers were killed in serious accidents alone within a few months. Experts who tried to talk sense were persecuted. Mao set the tone for discrediting rationality by saying that "bourgeois professors' knowledge should be treated as dogs' fart, worth nothing, deserving only disdain," scorn, contempt. . .



------


tombstone:


	...Given the poverty and backwardness of China, its Communist leadership harbored an even more pressing desire for change. Speed took precedence over practicality, with a particularly heavy reliance on mass movements.3 The leaders responsible for economic work were more practical, but any attempt to express their ideas risked accusations of “right-deviationist thinking.” As soon as Mao began criticizing right deviation, the majority joined in, creating enormous political pressure. Leaders who persisted faced criticism not only from Mao but also from their peers.


how did Mao get obsessed with "right-deviationist thinking?"


	...At an assembly of more than 120 Beijing-based members of the CCP Central Committee and leaders of all party, government, and military organs in the conference room of Zhongnanhai’s Western Pavilion on the afternoon of December 5, 1955, Liu Shaoqi transmitted Mao’s directives on criticizing right-deviating conservatism and striving to achieve the transition ahead of schedule:4 “If we proceed along a conventional route, the time required will be longer and the results less impressive. This is the conservative route. At present our work in all areas is lagging behind the evolving situation; many of our comrades are proceeding along this conservative route.”5


associate conventional ways of agrigulture with "conservative?" iirc Mao believed in magical thinkin, like with power of communism can get grain yields 3x inferior old "imperial" ways or something like that

Lynenkoism was also like this: touted as amazing new "communist" way of doing agrigultrues based on communist theory that capitalists didn't know about


	...In January 1956, Mao repeatedly observed that the Americans produced a mere 100 million tons of steel and a few hundred hydrogen bombs and that China would catch up with them as a first step before ultimately overtaking them. Beginning on February 14, 1956, a total of thirty-four ministries and commissions reported back to the CCP Central Committee. As each report was read out, Mao would become very excited, interposing encouraging remarks such as “China’s industrial development can proceed more swiftly than the Soviet Union’s,” and “China has two advantages: one is emptiness, the other is blankness, with no encumbrances of any kind. The United States in George Washington’s era was blank, so it could develop very rapidly. The Soviet Union was also blank at the outset.”


Mao unusual interest in comparing steel output to other countries

said to become "very excited" at commisison reports of progress

saw his nation as coming from "blank" into modern industrialization


------

tombstone:

	...One reason behind Mao’s desire to build socialism was his rivalry with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev for the leadership of the International Communist Movement. After Stalin’s death in 1953, Mao looked down on Khrushchev. The Korean War had raised Mao’s own status and had given him a feeling of One reason behind Mao’s desire to build socialism was his rivalry with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev for the leadership of the International Communist Movement. After Stalin’s death in 1953, Mao looked down on Khrushchev. The Korean War had raised Mao’s own status and had given him a feeling of invincibility within the Comintern. Although he continued to pay lip service to the Soviet Union as the leader of the socialist camp, in his heart he had already usurped this position. In order for Mao to take over actual leadership, however, China’s socialism had to overtake other socialist countries. Mao spoke of surpassing the United Kingdom and the United States, but his greatest wish was to overtake the Soviet Union.


rivaly with Kruschvev, looked down on him

iirc Mao thought Stalin some kind of genius, Kruschev distrusted and saw himself as taking mantle of next Communist great thinker and leader of Communist world

"greatest wish" to overtake Soviet Union (in steel? what else?)